Cricket-fan Mr Sunak dished out gongs to some of his closest political allies including Michael Gove. The Brexiteer served in the cabinets of four prime ministers before standing down as an MP ahead of last July's general election.

Former England cricketer James Anderson has been awarded a knighthood in Rishi Sunak ’s resignation honours list. Sir James, who retired from test cricket in July having taken more wickets than any fast bowler in test history, is joined on the list by a number of Tory politicians who received peerages and knighthoods.

Full list of resignation honours

Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG)

The Rt Hon Andrew Mitchell MP, former Secretary of State for International Development and Deputy Foreign Secretary. For political and public service.

Order of the British Empire, Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire

The Rt Hon Theresa Villiers MP, former Member of Parliament for Chipping Barnet. For political and public service.

Knights Bachelor, Knighthood

James Anderson OBE, England Cricketer. For services to cricket.

The Rt Hon James Cleverly MP, former Home Secretary and former Foreign Secretary. For political and public service.

The Rt Hon Jeremy Hunt MP, former Chancellor of the Exchequer, Foreign Secretary, Health Secretary and Culture Secretary. For political and public service.

The Rt Hon Grant Shapps MP, former Defence Secretary, Energy Secretary, Business Secretary, Home Secretary and Transport Secretary. For political and public service.

The Rt Hon Mel Stride MP, former Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. For political and public service.

Matthew Vaughn, Filmmaker. For services to the creative industries.

Order of the Bath, Companion in the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (CB)

Elizabeth Perelman, former Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister. For public service.

Order of St Michael and St George, Companion of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George (CMG)

John Bew, former Foreign Policy Advisor to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Order of the British Empire, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire (CBE)

Nerissa Chesterfield, former Director of Communications at No10 Downing Street. For political and public service.

Cassian Horowitz, former Special Advisor to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Lisa Lovering, former Head of Operations at No10 Downing Street. For political and public service.

William Tanner, former Deputy Chief of Staff to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Rupert Yorke, former Deputy Chief of Staff to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Officers of the Order of the British Empire (OBE)

Eden Barnes, former Head of Events and Visits at No10 Downing Street. For political and public service.

Aidan Corley, former Head of Research and Messaging, 10 Downing Street, and Special Adviser to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Douglas McNeill, former Chief Economic Advisor to Prime Minister. For political and public service.

James Nation, former Deputy Director of the Number 10 Policy Unit. For political and public service.

Jamie Njoku-Goodwin, former Special Advisor to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Lucy Noakes, former Press Secretary to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Timothy Pitt, former Special Adviser to the Prime Minister. For political and public service.

Robert Trotter, former official speechwriter for the Prime Minister. For public service.

Henry de Zoete, former adviser to the Prime Minister on Artificial Intelligence. For public service.

Members of the Order of the British Empire (MBE)

Ronald Kirk, former Councillor for Great Ayton, Hambleton District Council. For political and public service.

George Livesey, Senior Parliamentary Assistant to the Rt Hon Rishi Sunak MP. For political and public service.

Yvonne Peacock, Councillor for the Upper Dales, North Yorkshire Council. For political and public service.

Medallists of the Order of the British Empire (BEM)

David McCormick, Collections Manager at Chequers. For public service.

Emma Paterson, Head Housekeeper at Chequers. For public service.