ACLU Briefing: Inside the Supreme Court Term
That’s the end of our live coverage today. Thank you all for joining us.
Our work continues. Join our team of legal experts next Tuesday, July 1, from 5-6 pm ET for a full debrief on today’s rulings, plus the other critical rulings decided during this Supreme Court term.
You’ll learn more about how these rulings influence the work ahead and how you can get involved.
The fight to protect birthright citizenship isn’t over.
Today’s Supreme Court decision limiting court oversight is concerning for mixed-status families, but this fight is far from over.
The ACLU has a separate legal challenge against President Trump's executive order attacking birthright citizenship — and that case is still moving forward. We cannot let cruel, racist, unconstitutional policies wreak havoc on our communities and deny basic rights to countless children.
BREAKING: We're filing a new nationwide class-action lawsuit
We just filed a new nationwide class-action lawsuit challenging the Trump administration’s executive order restricting birthright citizenship. The lawsuit is in response to today’s Supreme Court ruling that potentially opens the door for partial enforcement of the executive order.
The 14th Amendment is clear: Every child born on U.S. soil is a citizen, whether the president likes it or not.
We'll continue fighting to make sure President Trump cannot trample on the citizenship rights of a single child.
NEW: Louisiana v. Callais
The Supreme Court declined to rule this term on a congressional map that fairly represents Black voters in Louisiana.
We're prepared to continue fighting until Black voters get the representation they deserve.
BREAKING: We have a decision in Free Speech Coalition, Inc. v. Paxton
The Supreme Court upheld a Texas law that requires adults to prove their age before accessing sexual content online.This burdens the speech rights of adults and won't protect children.
Adults should not have to put their privacy and security at risk just to access constitutionally protected speech.
BREAKING: We have a decision in Mahmoud v. Taylor
The Supreme Court ruled that Montgomery County Public Schools must allow religious opt-outs from any lessons that parents believe will interfere with the religious development of their children, including LGBTQ-themed materials.
The decision could have far-reaching consequences for public schools’ ability to create an inclusive and welcoming environment that reflects the diversity of their communities, as well schools’ ability to implement any secular lesson plan that may trigger religious objections.
BREAKING: We have a decision in Trump v. CASA, Inc.
The Supreme Court limited – but did not eliminate – the ability of courts to block illegal federal government policies, in a case involving President Trump’s executive order that aims to decimate birthright citizenship.
Under the ruling, the birthright citizenship order remains blocked nationwide for at least 30 days. We will use every tool at our disposal to prevent any child from being denied citizenship under this unconstitutional policy.
Preview: Trump v. CASA, Inc.
Preview: Louisiana v. Callais
The Facts: In this case, the Supreme Court will determine whether Louisiana's congressional map, which now includes two majority-Black districts, constitutes a racial gerrymander.
Our Argument: With such a significant Black population in Louisiana, it's imperative that the state’s congressional districts mirror this demographic reality to ensure fair representation. Simply put, the new map allows Black voters to elect candidates who genuinely represent their communities' concerns and interests. This aligns with the Voting Rights Act, which mandates that electoral maps not dilute the voting power of communities of color.
Preview: Free Speech Coalition, Inc. v. Paxton
The Facts: The court must decide if a Texas law that forces people to share personally identifying information — potentially including a picture of themselves, biometric scans, or their government ID — before they can access websites that host some amount of sexual content is a violation of the First Amendment.
Our Argument: This law threatens all of our First Amendment rights, regardless of age. It reflects the government’s distaste for specific topics and messages–those about sex–and so it has to pass a very strict test to satisfy the First Amendment. The government argues that the law just has to be reasonable since its goal is to protect kids, but accepting that argument could open the door to all manner of speech regulation – and it doesn’t even actually protect kids. Pornography is often the canary in the coalmine when it comes to protecting free speech.
While proponents of age-verification laws liken them to showing your ID before buying pornography in person, the reality of online age verification is much more invasive. In the physical world, age-gating is easy, but the online version of this process is far more burdensome, time-consuming, and risky.
Preview: Mahmoud v. Taylor
The Facts: This case asks whether a Maryland school district’s refusal to allow parents to opt their children out of an LGBTQ-inclusive English curriculum a violation of parents’ free-speech, free-exercise, and substantive-due-process rights under the U.S. Constitution and Maryland law.
Our Argument: In a friend-of-the-court brief, we argue that the “no opt-out” policy does not violate parents’ free exercise First Amendment rights. Although the school district previously allowed opt-outs for any reason from portions of the English Language Arts curriculum featuring storybooks with LGBTQ characters and themes, the growing number of opt-outs proved to be disruptive and divisive. Teachers were forced to divert time and resources to create alternative lessons for students who opted out, and many students simply did not attend school at all for the day. In addition, the opt-outs stigmatized LGBTQ students and those with LGBTQ family members.
Supreme Court decisions will be released soon.
Good morning, everyone. Today is the final day of the Supreme Court term. There are still 5 cases left in their regular docket, and the ACLU has served as counsel or filed friend-of-the-court briefs in these three cases:
We’re also closely watching cases on the court’s “shadow docket,” or emergency docket. It’s possible that the Supreme Court also announces a decision today in Trump v. CASA, Inc., a case where the Trump administration is challenging nationwide injunctions blocking Trump's executive order to end birthright citizenship for children of undocumented immigrants.
Decisions will be released starting at 10 a.m. While we wait, you can read more about the Supreme Court cases we’re watching here: