Secretary of State

Marco Rubio

Secretary of State Marco Rubio was born in Miami, Florida in 1971. He is the son of Cuban immigrants who left Cuba in pursuit of the American Dream. His father worked as a banquet bartender, while his mother split time as a stay-at-home mom and hotel maid. From an early age, Rubio learned the importance of faith, family, community, and dignified work.

Rubio is passionate about the American Dream because he’s lived it himself. He was drawn to public service in large part because of conversations with his grandfather, who witnesses how communism destroyed his homeland. After meeting and marrying his wife Jeanette, he served as a City Commissioner in West Miami and as Speaker of the Florida House of Representatives. In 2010, he won a seat in the U.S. Senate. He served as U.S. Senator until 2025.

During his tenure in the U.S. Senate, Rubio was committed to serving the people of Florida and ensuring America remained a strong, resilient nation for genera­tions to come. He was a Senior Member of the Senate Foreign Relations Commit­tee, Vice Chair of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, a member of the powerful Senate Appropriations Committee, as well as the Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship.

Rubio wrote and passed the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, which rep­resents the greatest turning point in U.S.-China relations in decades. He also co-led the Hong Kong Relations Act, and the VERDAD Act. During the first Trump Administration, he worked with the President to hold members of the Cuban re­gime accountable, including the dictatorship’s military holding company. He also created the Paycheck Protection Program, which helped save millions of small businesses in America when the COVID pandemic hit.

In November 2024, President Trump nominated Rubio to serve as America’s Secretary of State. Secretary Rubio was the first cabinet member who was confirmed in the second Trump Administration. He received a historic unanimous vote of 99-0 in the U.S. Senate.

Rubio was sworn in as the 72nd Secretary of State on January 21, 2025. The Sec­retary’s main priority is to have a Department of State that puts America First.

Deputy Secretary of State

Christopher Landau

Christopher Landau was sworn in as the 23rd Deputy Secretary of State on March 25, 2025. Deputy Secretary Landau served as United States Ambassador to Mexico from 2019 to 2021 during President Trump’s first administration. Before and after his tenure in Mexico, he was engaged in the private practice of law in Washington, D.C. for more than three decades.

As Ambassador to Mexico, Deputy Secretary Landau presided over the United States’ largest diplomatic mission and fostered unprecedented bilateral coop­eration that yielded results including the ratification and entry into force of the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Free Trade Agreement, protection of border commerce and regional supply chains during the pandemic, and the lowest levels of illegal migration in years.

Deputy Secretary Landau’s legal practice focused on appellate litigation. He has briefed and argued cases involving a wide variety of topics in the U.S. Supreme Court and all of the federal courts of appeals.

Deputy Secretary Landau was born in Madrid, Spain, where his father George Landau (later United States Ambassador to Paraguay, Chile, and Venezuela) was stationed with the U.S. Foreign Service. Deputy Secretary Landau brings his perspective as both a recent United States Ambassador and upbringing in the foreign service, as well as his extensive legal background, to his current position.

A graduate of Harvard College and Harvard Law School, Deputy Secretary Lan­dau clerked twice at the Supreme Court, first for Justice Antonin Scalia and then for Justice Clarence Thomas. He is fluent in Spanish and proficient in French. He is married to Caroline Bruce Landau, and they have two adult children, Nathaniel and Julia.

Senior Bureau Official

Lew Olowski

Lew Olowski is a national security lawyer and diplomat who served as Senior Counselor at the Department of Homeland Security during President Trump’s first term, where his practice areas included border security, China policy, trade enforcement, and humanitarian law. Now Lew serves as Senior Advisor to the immediate office of the Secretary of State, Marco Rubio.

Prior to his government service, Lew’s private sector experience included Gen­eral Counsel for Tucker Carlson’s The Daily Caller News Foundation and Senior Counsel at Immigration Reform Law Institute. Lew’s articles have appeared in The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post, FOX News, and other media.

Lew earned his J.D. degree and LL.M. in International Trade Law at Georgetown Law and he studied European Union Law at University College London before Brexit. Lew has worked in Beijing, in Abu Dhabi, and at The Hague, Netherlands as a clerk at the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. He speaks Chinese, Arabic, and Polish. Lew is married to Heather Olowski — the top Civil Rights attorney at the Department of State — and father to Victoria and Gabriel.

The Director General’s Foreign Service Cup

Phillip Linderman

Phillip Linderman is a retired State Department senior Foreign Service officer. Over a three-decade career, he served abroad in U.S. embassies and consulates in Belgium, Mexico, Ecuador, Germany, Cuba, Chile, and Trinidad. He also represented U.S. interests at the Organization of American States and the European Union.

Linderman’s diplomatic duties often focused on international travel security and protecting national borders. He collaborated with friendly foreign governments and worked with U.S. law enforcement and intelligence agencies on visa and passport fraud, human trafficking, terrorist travel, and watchlisting. He serves as a board member and fellow for the Center for Immigration Studies. Linderman has written widely on immigration and border security matters.

The Director General’s Civil Service Cup

Kenneth D. Rogers

Ken is a visionary leader who helps organizations transform complexity into opportunity. With a career spanning five U.S. federal agencies and dozens of countries, he has delivered results at the highest levels of government and industry. From modernizing global I.T. operations for the U.S. State Department to advising on small business development in emerging economies, his work is defined by a deep understanding of people, systems, strategy, and mission.

A former SES Deputy CIO at the State Department oversaw a $3.8B global tech portfolio. He has also held senior technology leadership roles at DHS, the Department of Commerce, and Ex-Im Bank, and has trained senior U.S. and foreign cyber leaders at the National Defense University. His private sector background includes finance, aerospace, and advising multinationals and small firms on innovation and international growth.

Now, as founder and principal of his own strategic consultancy, he partners with clients who seek to navigate disruption, modernize with integrity, and make a global impact.

He is also a Ph.D. candidate at Virginia Tech, a thought leader at the intersection of technology, public policy, and international strategy, and founder and CEO of Legato Strategies, LLC, an international consultancy.

American Foreign Service Association (AFSA)

President, Tom Yazdgerdi

A member of the Senior Foreign Service, Tom Yazdgerdi served from 2019 to 2023 as the AFSA State VP and is proud of the many wins that AFSA has gotten for our members. Before that, he was special envoy for Holocaust issues in the European and Eurasian Bureau at the Department of State.

Mr. Yazdgerdi has served as director of the Office of South Central European Affairs, political counselor at U.S. Embassy Kabul, head of U.S. Consulate Kirkuk, and deputy political counselor for Iran affairs at U.S. Embassy Baghdad. He also served as deputy chief of mission and political economic chief at U.S. Embassy Pristina during the run-up to and aftermath of Kosovo independence. Before joining the Foreign Service in 1991, Mr. Yazdgerdi worked on Capitol Hill. He holds a bachelor’s degree in history from Cornell University and a master’s degree in Central European history, security studies, and American diplomatic history from The Fletcher School at Tufts University.



AFSA Memorial Ceremony

Memorial plaques in the C street lobby of the department of state honor those of our colleagues who have given their lives in circumstances distinctive to over­seas service. AFSA is proud to administer these plaques to preserve the memory of these courageous individuals.