CHICAGO (WLS) -- Former President Joe Biden took the stage at Chicago's Sofitel Hotel on Tuesday evening.
He spoke in front of a packed house at a bipartisan conference, addressing the challenges facing the Social Security Administration and the tens of millions of Americans who rely on its services.
"Social Security is more than a government program. It's a sacred promise!" Biden said.
Former Commissioner of Social Security Administration Martin O'Malley introduced Biden at a conference organized by Advocates, Counselors and Representatives for the Disabled. The organization bills itself as a leader in supporting people who depend on Social Security and disability services.
"This conference happens at a really important time in our country's history and in the history of Social Security, which has never missed a payment in 90 years, but is now under a tremendous threat," O'Malley said. "We need to have our voices heard. This is our government. It doesn't belong to Elon Musk or any one president, and we need to preserve Social Security for the here and now, and for our kids and theirs," O'Malley said.
Biden called out the current administration for "taking a hatchet" to Social Security just months after one of his last acts in office was celebrating the signing of the Social Security Fairness Act.
SEE ALSO | Social Security Administration backtracks on some ID requirements after backlash
"In fewer than 100 days, this new administration has made, has done so much damage and so much destruction. It's kind of breathtaking," Biden said. "They are following that old line from tech start-ups. The quote is 'move fast, break things.' They're certainly breaking things."
Even before Biden took his grievances to the podium, President Donald Trump signaled plans to sign a memorandum to block undocumented immigrants from receiving Social Security benefits.
And earlier Tuesday, White House Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt was asked about Biden's speech.
"My first reaction when seeing former President Biden was speaking tonight was, I'm shocked that he is speaking at nighttime. I thought his bedtime was much earlier," Leavitt said.
Leavitt went on to defend Trump's stance on Social Security, despite Democrats sounding the alarm on the closing of Social Security offices, longer wait times and accessibility for seniors and people with disabilities to receive their benefits.
"President Trump is absolutely certain about protecting Social Security benefits for law-abiding, tax-paying American citizens and seniors who have paid into this program," she said.
RELATED | Judge blasts Social Security fraud 'fishing expedition' by Elon Musk's DOGE
And yet, the Trump administration's actions say otherwise, according to O'Malley.
O'Malley estimates two-thirds of the agency's senior executive leaders have either quit or have been paid to quit, in addition to the planned workforce reduction of 7,000 agency employees.
"I truly believe that they have done such damage to this agency in such a short period of time that we're likely to see the first benefit interruptions that this agency has ever seen," O'Malley said.
Attendees at Tuesday's conference are still uncertain of what is to come for the people they serve.
"For my coworkers and I, we want to provide the best service for all the claimants that we have, and when you just don't know what's going to happen next, it's hard to comfort these people," said Salus Disability Law Finance and Strategy Director Cade Maldonado.
Meanwhile, Biden's appearance is one of his first since leaving the White House. The former president has been quiet in the first few months of his post-presidency despite near daily criticism from Trump.
READ MORE | Pritzker called to testify in DC as Trump threatens to withhold funding from sanctuary cities
Earlier Tuesday, Gov. JB Pritzker was asked about Biden's planned appearance in Chicago.
"I think in his post-presidency, what a perfect thing for him to be doing, honestly, to be meeting with people with disabilities, organizations that stand up for them, and highlighting Social Security, which is under attack by the new administration," Pritzker said.
According to O'Malley, roughly 73 million Americans are beneficiaries of the Social Security Administration.
So, Biden's remarks on Tuesday evening were, in some ways, a direct address to all of those people many of which rely on Social Security and disability services as their sole source of income.
The former president also said on Tuesday night that in all his years of politics, he has never seen the nation so divided.