MARKUP NOTICE: House Committee on the Budget
WASHINGTON, D.C. - On Friday, May 16th, 2025, at 9:00 AM in 210 Cannon House Office Building, the House Committee on the Budget will hold a markup to provide for reconciliation pursuant to title II of the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for Fiscal Year 2025, H. Con. Res. 14.
Committee hearings and markups are available LIVE from our website, YouTube, and social media.
Seating in the hearing room is limited. Members of the public may view the markup via live webcast available here. The webcast will not be available until the markup starts.
DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:
Individuals or organizations may submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the printed record. Any person(s) or organization(s) can submit written comments for the record here: Ryan.Bailey@mail.house.gov.
Please ATTACH your submission as a Microsoft Word document in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below by the close of business on Monday, May 19th. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems, please call 202-226-7270.
FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:
The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official record. As always, submissions will be included in the record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will not alter the content of your submission but reserves the right to format it according to guidelines.
Any materials submitted for the printed record and any written comments in response to a request for written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in compliance with these guidelines will not be printed but will be maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.
All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in a single document via email, provided in Word format and must not exceed a total of 10 pages. Please indicate the date of the markup and the legislation being considered as the subject line in your submission. Submitters are advised that the Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official record.
All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/or organizations on whose behalf the individual or organization is submitting. The name, company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each individual or organization must be included in the body of the email. Please exclude any personally identifiable information in the attached submission.
Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.
ACCOMMODATIONS:
The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons with disabilities. If you require accommodations, please call 202-226-7270 in advance of the event (48 hours notice is requested). Questions regarding accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as noted above.
Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on the Committee website at https://budget.house.gov/news.
See the full bill text here: One Big Beautiful Bill Act - Full Bill Text