In short:
The Tasmanian premier has told state parliament that Tasmania will not get an AFL team if special legislation to build a stadium is not passed — but one parliamentarian says the premier needs to "ease up with that rhetoric and allow us to do our job".
Meanwhile, a group opposing the stadium has released new images purporting to show what the completed structure will look like, accusing the government of misleading the public as to its visual impact.
What's next?
A Tasmanian AFL team being allowed to play in the national competition hinges on a new roofed stadium being built as a key condition of the government's deal with the league.
Tasmanian Premier Jeremy Rockliff has issued an ultimatum to upper house MPs ahead of a vote on special legislation that would enable an AFL stadium on Hobart's waterfront, saying a Tasmanian AFL team won't go ahead unless the legislation passes.
The state government promised to put forward special legislation to allow the stadium to be built, after saying it no longer had faith in the Project of State Significance (POSS) process being undertaken by the state's planning commission.
It is yet to be released publicly, but is expected to be voted on in June.
It's guaranteed to pass the lower house, where Labor has vowed its support, but needs two upper house independents on board for it to pass the Legislative Council.
Mr Rockliff has told state parliament the special legislation will be the one and only vote Tasmanian politicians get on the stadium, and whether a Tasmanian team joins the AFL.
"If the legislation is not passed, the stadium won't go ahead and the team will not go ahead and the POSS process won't go ahead," Mr Rockliff told state parliament.
"The POSS process will end, it will all end, if we don't get this enabling legislation through."
The construction of a roofed stadium at Macquarie Point is a key condition of the agreement for the 19th AFL licence struck between the Tasmanian government and the league.
It is unclear how the POSS process will be finalised if the special legislation fails, but it's understood it would involve the Macquarie Point Development Corporation withdrawing from the process.
Questions about whether the corporation has that power have been sent to the state government and the MPDC.
MPs have been briefed that the enabling legislation will include a clause ending the Planning Commission's assessment of the stadium if it passes.
Premier's language 'threatening', upper house MP says
Murchison MLC Ruth Forrest, who has yet to declare her position on the enabling legislation, said the premier's language in state parliament was "quite threatening and appears to be coercive in its nature".
"He needs to ease up with that rhetoric and allow us to do our job, a really important job on behalf of the people of Tasmania," Ms Forrest said.
"That's my job. I do not want to be coerced. I certainly won't take any blame for a decision that may or may not occur."
Ms Forrest has long focused on the financial impact of the stadium, and said she needed to understand how the project would affect the state's budgetary position before she could support it.
"If it negatively impacts our cash position with the additional bexclusiveorrowings that the government would need to make, then that means less cash to fund services, and that is a concern and I need to be sure that any decision I make doesn't put the state in a worse position," she said.
Independent Elwick MLC Bec Thomas said she was also concerned by the premier's comments.
"It's disrespectful to the intelligence of Tasmanians to try to trick them into believing responsibility for the AFL team lies with MPs who had no involvement in signing the deal with the AFL that mandated it," Ms Thomas said.
"My decision will be based on whether there is sufficient information to demonstrate the stadium can be built at Macquarie Point and a clear plan on how the government intends to pay for it.
"I will also need to understand how infrastructure associated with the stadium will be funded, including not just the northern access road and other projects referred to in the MPDC's submission, but also the northern suburbs transit corridor and more community sports facilities."
Labor MP Josh Willie, who was previously a member of the Legislative Council, said upper house MPs "do not like being wedged by the government of the day".
"They are process-driven people. You need to work with the upper house to get your agenda through," Mr Willie said.
"If the premier thinks he's going to skate through parliament threatening the upper house, not providing information to decision makers, the bill will fail and it will be a catastrophic blow to his leadership."
Anti-stadium group releases new mock-ups
Anti-stadium group Our Place fronted by Hobart lawyer Roland Browne has released a submission to the Tasmanian Planning Commission that includes visualisations from several viewpoints around Hobart of what it says the completed stadium would look like.
The group used town planning and urban design expert Tim Biles to prepare a representation that responds to the commission's draft report and a visual impact report.
The submission targets two images released by the Macquarie Point Development Corporation that Mr Browne described as "grossly misleading".
"They underplay the impact of the stadium deliberately,"he said.
The submission includes six images that purport to show the size and impact of the project.
"People need to understand the enormity of this building to really form their opinion on the basis of accurate facts," Mr Browne said.
"The materials put forward by Macquarie Point Development Corporation to date have in part been misleading and we are correcting that."
Mr Browne said the POSS process had still been beneficial due to the large amount of material it has produced, despite the government abandoning it for enabling legislation.
The group's focus will now shift to upper house MPs.
"We'll certainly be taking this information to the upper house, they are going to have a very important role to play," he said.
"But it's not just about the MPs in the upper house, this is about the whole community and a decision everyone needs to be abreast of because the consequences of this stadium project starting construction is going to be bankruptcy of the Tasmanian community."
Mr Browne said Mr Rockliff and the government had already misled Tasmanians over the height of the stadium and the funding structure.
"They are changing course at every moment to try and find a way to facilitate this stadium to save his political career and it's not going to work,"he said.
Public submissions through the POSS process close on Thursday.
Loading...