2:21 p.m. EDT

MS BRUCE: Good, there’s air conditioning in here. (Laughter.) Very good it’s air conditioned. Beautiful June day. Hi, everybody.

QUESTION: Hello.

QUESTION: Hi.

MS BRUCE: Fox – those folks at Fox. Busy with TV, probably. All right. Great, nice to see you guys. Again, I take it Tommy took good care of you last week. You will have Tommy again a week from today when I’m with the Secretary traveling, so be prepared. You’ve got a week to prepare, but of course I’ll also see you again on Thursday.

We do have some announcements here. First of all, over the last few days, Americans have witnessed scenes of lawlessness as radicals in Los Angeles riot to protect criminal illegal aliens. Agitators have attacked law enforcement and shut down freeways. We remain undeterred in our commitment to enforce our laws and secure the border. During recent days, the administration has taken illegal alien gang members, child predators, rapists, and burglars off the streets.

Thanks to the historic action across all of government under President Trump, the border is more secure than it ever has been, with illegal border crossings at a historic low. The border crisis that unfolded under the previous administration, however, did untold damage. The Big Beautiful Bill, as an example, before Congress will build on President Trump’s progress, ensuring we have the resources to enforce our laws and secure our border. To that end, the United States is committed to disrupting the illicit manufacture and trafficking of fentanyl, a leading cause of death of people aged 18 to 49, in the United States.

Yesterday the United States announced that it is sanctioning Los Chapitos, a powerful faction of the Mexico-based Sinaloa Cartel, along with its two fugitive leaders. The United States is also designating a regional network of Los Chapitos, associates, and businesses based in Mazatlán, Mexico. This network engages in drug trafficking, extortion, kidnapping, and money laundering.

Under Secretary Marco Rubio, the statement – the State Department will continue to protect our nation by keeping illicit drugs off our streets and disrupting the revenue streams funding Mexico-based cartels’ violent and criminal activity. In addition, Deputy Secretary of State Christopher Landau will travel to Mexico, El Salvador, and Guatemala from June 10th to the 13th. As detailed in the trip announcement, quote, “In each country, Deputy Secretary Landau will participate in [a] high-level bilateral engagements to further strengthen diplomatic ties and cooperation. He will engage in discussions to drive [the] private sector led economic growth, boost U.S. commercial investments in our region, and highlight the importance of ending illegal immigration.”

In addition – there are additional announcements today, of course. The United States sanctioned five individuals and five sham charities for financially supporting Hamas under the guise of humanitarian work. Additionally, we are targeting a fraudulent charity linked to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the PFLP. The United States will use all available tools to prevent abuse of the nonprofit sector for the benefit of terrorist groups like Hamas and the PFLP. We are committed to ensuring humanitarian aid can in fact be delivered by reliable and safe organizations.

Finally, cultural diplomacy remains an important endeavor of the Trump Administration. The Kennedy Center exemplifies this commitment, and its gala is tomorrow night, led by the musical Les Miserables. The center will have a season that will have Broadway, ballet, opera, and even Dolly Parton, in addition to a lot of other great things for kids as well. In this world of ours, it sounds very nice and very appropriate.

And now to your questions. Sounds like Matt Lee is happy – is amused. I hoped you might be —

QUESTION: I’m sorry, I just had to – well —

MS BRUCE: Some coughing? I know you weren’t laughing. And you might —

QUESTION: I wasn’t laughing.

MS BRUCE: It would be good to become, perhaps, a season ticket holder to the Kennedy Center. I’m just saying. But go ahead.

QUESTION: I would be happy to —

MS BRUCE: Good.

QUESTION: — be a season ticket holder to the Kennedy Center.

MS BRUCE: Yeah.

QUESTION: And I would love to see Les Mis because I never saw it.

MS BRUCE: There you go.

QUESTION: But anyway, listen, just on your topper —

MS BRUCE: Yes, sir.

QUESTION: — and then I want to go to – shoot really quickly to the Middle East.

MS BRUCE: Sure.

QUESTION: Just on the topper, the State Department doesn’t have any role in what’s going on in LA in terms of – in terms of quelling the violence; is that correct?

MS BRUCE: Well, as I would view it, and I think that we all know that many of the aspects regarding illegal immigration —

QUESTION: Right.

MS BRUCE: — certainly on the issue of visas —

QUESTION: Right.

MS BRUCE: — the controlling of the border, the designating of Foreign Terrorist Organizations, is one part of a whole-of-government effort to keep the country safe —

QUESTION: Okay.

MS BRUCE: — to keep Americans safe. Don’t push me off here. There is —

QUESTION: I’m not.

MS BRUCE: I’m answering your question. And so when we see the dynamic of what’s happening in Los Angeles, it is, I think, quite appropriate for Americans to see this – and it is – the nature of what we are working to do together through the Trump Administration to secure this country and to secure our streets. And that means, yes, removing criminal illegal aliens and getting them back to their home countries, and certainly at least getting them off American streets so that Americans can feel safer in their own homes and in their own communities.

And so in the midst of that, when we talk about – of course it’s the State Department, it’s the DOJ, it’s ICE, it’s the Department of Homeland Security, it is the White House, it is a multitude of departments working together to envision and implement President Trump’s vision.

QUESTION: Okay. Let me —

MS BRUCE: Yes, sir.

QUESTION: — go to the Middle East. So, Ambassador Huckabee gave an interview earlier – I think it was earlier today, maybe it was yesterday – but in which he called into question – or didn’t call into question; he basically said that the administration is not particularly interested in seeking a two-state solution for the Israel-Palestinian conflict. And I want to know – I mean, he’s been outspoken on this issue in the past, before he became ambassador, but is he speaking on his own or is this now administration policy that you’re no longer so interested in that kind of a resolution?

MS BRUCE: Well, first of all, I’m not going to characterize the ambassador’s remarks. I’m not going to explain them or really comment on them at all. I think he certainly speaks for himself. At the same time, of course, ambassadors are there and they’re working with their host country, but when it comes to American policy and certainly where the President stands, I’d suggest you call the White House.

QUESTION: Okay. Thanks.

MS BRUCE: All right. Yes, Andrea Mitchell.

QUESTION: Hi, thank you, Tammy. Let me ask you about part of the potential enforcement of the administration’s policies to deter illegal immigration. There is reporting of a potential plan to send undocumented immigrants or others who have been detained to Guantanamo, perhaps as soon as tomorrow, while there is a court case pending to rule out Guantanamo as a place to send people, saying that it is not necessary, it is too expensive, and that the conditions are intolerable; but that this would include Europeans from allied countries who – countries that would willingly accept deportations of their illegal immigrants here.

So, what is the State Department’s position on whether European illegal immigrants, migrants who’ve been detained, should be sent to Guantanamo rather than to their host countries, including countries that would very willingly accept them? Do you think that this would damage relationships with our allies?

MS BRUCE: Well, first of all, I can tell you that this entire dynamic that – it’s managed by DHS, first of all. It’s certainly not a dynamic managed by the State Department. I can also say that of course it’s not new that we are moving criminal illegal aliens to Guantanamo prior – it’s not the final destination. It’s prior to their being sent to their home country. But when it comes to each country, I’m not going to speak to that, but I would suggest that —

QUESTION: I have a follow-up.

MS BRUCE: Well, I won’t speak to any country when it comes to the illegal aliens, the criminal aliens that may or may not be sent to Guantanamo Bay. That clearly sits within a diplomatic framework. You’re asking me to speak on what the Secretary or others might be discussing with their foreign counterparts, and I’m certainly not going to do that. I’m not going to speculate, and what – nor will I guess or speculate on the nature of any kind of backlash or the impact on the State Department. What I can tell you is that the backlash would be, is if we weren’t doing our job – State Department and the Secretary has been very specific about our role, which is the vetting of people who are coming here in the first place; removing illegal aliens who are here, criminal illegal aliens, whether they’ve overstayed their visa or are here illegally entirely. We are very focused on the nature of what the State Department has as its charge, and this is a framework, again, that, as we – I just mentioned to Matt, where you’ve got a whole-of-government framework. The DHS is in charge of this particular aspect.

QUESTION: But the DHS literally would be in charge, but does the State Department have a view about what the diplomatic impact would be on our allies and —

MS BRUCE: Again, I’m – Andrea, you know I’m not here to speak about —

QUESTION: Well, you speak for the State Department.

MS BRUCE: — the diplomatic opinion or the speculation of the nature of the feelings of – I’m here to talk about the specifics. You’re right, the United States has increased enforcement of immigration laws and removal of illegal aliens. They are being removed because they didn’t have a legal basis to be in the United States. These are the – and the why, the visa dynamics, the nature of – that we have the right, like every country does, to control who comes in and to have an interest in who stays. And that’s what this is about.

QUESTION: Do you think that sending people to Guantanamo might have a salutary deterrent impact? Would that help the whole-of-government approach which you are describing?

MS BRUCE: What I can say is that this is a very specific mission to make American streets safer, and this is why President Trump was elected, to do exactly this.

Yes, ma’am.

QUESTION: Thank you. Just going back to Matt’s question on Huckabee’s comments, I know you said that the ambassador speaks for himself, but he was appointed by the President and he does represent the U.S. Government in Israel. So, is it – is the two-state solution a goal of the U.S. State Department currently?

MS BRUCE: I’m not going to speak – again, what I also – what I said to Matt and what I’ll keep saying is I’m not going to parse the ambassador’s remarks. That’s not what I’m going to do here, and I’m also not going to speak about the nature of what people say that he was claiming or not claiming. I’m not going to have a speculative conversation about that right now. If you – I would suggest that when it comes to the policy of the United States, that sits with President Donald Trump, and he’s just – it’s like a 15-minute walk away from this building. Call them, and in fact, I think they would have an answer for you, I would think.

QUESTION: Okay. And then I’m just – I mean, they – of course, the President sets a policy, but Secretary of State is in charge of foreign policy. So irrelevant of what —

MS BRUCE: Well, yes. I’m not – this is –

QUESTION: — Ambassador —

MS BRUCE: Yes. I’m not going to begin a conversation speculating based on a statement Ambassador Huckabee may or may not have made. I would suggest when you – when we think about the policy, yes, Secretary Rubio implements President Trump’s vision for foreign policy. In speaking on that issue, with the everything going on in this world, we are focused clearly on the nature of the things that are in front of us. And if you – I would just suggest calling the White House to get – make a determination of the Trump policy, the Trump Administration’s approach in this regard.

So, Secretary Rubio doesn’t make foreign policy. It is – it’s his vision and implementation of President Trump’s point of view and President Trump’s vision.

QUESTION: What is the foreign policy?

MS BRUCE: And so that’s what Secretary Rubio does and obviously does it very well.

Yes, sir.

QUESTION: On that —

QUESTION: But what’s the vision that he’s implementing here, Tammy?

MS BRUCE: We’re not – I’m not going to begin to speculate or go into this.

QUESTION: How about the National Security Advisor (inaudible) —

MS BRUCE: I’m just not going to go here. Ladies, ladies, ladies, if you want to speak about the National Security Advisor, also call the White House.

Yes, sir.

QUESTION: Just to follow up on that issue —

MS BRUCE: Sure. And this will – go ahead.

QUESTION: Sure, but we have – what we have heard from the President is he wants the United States to take over Gaza, which is obviously one of the occupied Palestinian territories and would be part of a future two-state solution. So, is that – I mean, I have – you haven’t mentioned that, but should we assume that is part of the policy?

And therefore, that opens the question of what about the West Bank and East Jerusalem, and is that – I mean, Ambassador Huckabee seems to be suggesting there wouldn’t be a future Palestinian state in those remaining areas. So, we kind of know half of the answer to the question, in that you’ve said it’s President Trump’s view and decision of – he’s stated that, although you haven’t restated it here, about Gaza. So it’s just – if we could clarify what composition —

MS BRUCE: Well, there’s – clearly, there’s a focus on Gaza, and for very good reason. And that’s what we’re focused on is a ceasefire, is stopping the carnage, dealing with what’s going on in Gaza after, of course, the horrific events of October 7th, the nature of what’s happening with Iran and its death squads of Hamas and Hizballah and the Houthis. It is – it’s a full plate.

And what one does is you start – it’s – you start at the beginning, and you move forward. We are still working on dealing with either, certainly, ceasefire and peace for Gaza, and then, of course, the aftermath of that and rebuilding and dealing with what that means. At some point in time, that will hopefully be the major conversation here, right, is in the aftermath and the rebuilding and how that’s happening. And I would expect that to be a conversation that we’ll all be engaging in.

QUESTION: So is – but is it still the policy that the U.S. should take control of that territory during the crisis? Because that’s what the President has said.

MS BRUCE: I can’t – I don’t – look, what I’ve heard President Trump say and what I know the Secretary has always said is that Hamas can’t exist, that we’ve got to get a ceasefire, that we’ve got to have new ideas for making sure this doesn’t happen again and again and again. I know that the President has called for new ideas to help make that happen. I know that he has had some new ideas in how to do that. We know the region has chimed in with what it believes it can do when it comes to aid and even rebuilding.

But the fact of the matter is, right now, Hamas won’t even let the hostages go. Hamas still won’t put its weapons down. Hamas is still playing games, as people still die, as we do work to get food and aid into that region. So, we’re still at that kind of dynamic, and we will get to the other part, I hope, as soon as we can.

Nadia.

QUESTION: Thank you, Tammy. Just on the Middle East again, the Israeli prime minister said today there is significant progress in releasing the hostages and the ceasefire. Does the State Department share his view? And also want to ask you about the 20 people who have been killed today around distribution center. Last briefing, I believe, you said that the Israelis are investigating that. I’m just wondering how these people, who are being killed daily now – not one day passes without people being killed around this food distribution center. How can they get their food safely?

MS BRUCE: Well, of course, that is exactly what we’ve all been working on, right, is getting food and aid safely in. We also know that the UN had a horrible dynamic where they had flour that they report was stolen by Hamas and that – problems – and as I’ve said regularly, we all know it’s a war zone. It’s a war zone led by terrorists who don’t care about humanity or the future.

Regarding what’s happening on the ground there, I would refer you to the IDF in Israel, which continues, of course, to investigate. And in the case of what’s being led by the IDF in Israel there, I think that’s where you’d need to go in that regard.

And there was a third part. What was this?

QUESTION: Talking about the significant progress that Netanyahu was talking about today.

MS BRUCE: Yes. Well, again, I – yes, I can’t speak to what the prime minister has said.

QUESTION: Are they sharing anything with you, the State Department?

MS BRUCE: I can’t speak to that at this point, when it comes to what Netanyahu has said.

Said, yes.

QUESTION: Thank you.

MS BRUCE: And this will be the end for this particular stretch of questions. Yes.

QUESTION: Yeah. Thank you very kindly.

MS BRUCE: Sure.

QUESTION: Just to follow up on the questions that were raised on the two-state solution and so on —

MS BRUCE: Sure.

QUESTION: — now, we know that President Trump in his first term came up with the deal of the century, which spoke almost in detail about his vision. Let me ask you this. Now, there are 5.5 million Palestinians in between Gaza and the West Bank. And I want to ask you – if there is no position of the State Department at this time, because the State Department has always —

MS BRUCE: What I said was I was not going to speak about the issue.

QUESTION: Okay. I understand.

MS BRUCE: I did not say there was no position, sir.

QUESTION: Okay. All right.

MS BRUCE: Be very careful, because I’m not going to have you put on the record something that is entirely not true.

QUESTION: Okay.

MS BRUCE: And I want you to proceed with that in mind.

QUESTION: Okay. I take it back. I wanted to ask you: What do you consider the Palestinians in the West Bank? I mean, (inaudible) and so on.

MS BRUCE: I will not provide you what I consider —

QUESTION: Are they under occupation?

MS BRUCE: We are not going to – I will not – look, it was nice to be able to call on you, Said.

QUESTION: I understand that, but —

MS BRUCE: I’d like to be able to have a question that I can answer, but you’re asking me to speculate.

QUESTION: Okay.

MS BRUCE: I would say – I will just reiterate, as we move on to another issue, is that President Trump is a man who understands and is working – really has committed these five, six months to being a peacemaker and to changing things that people have not been able to change for half a century. And he is determined to do it. He cares about everybody. He cares about the people of Gaza; he cares about the Israelis; he cares about Jews; he cares about Christians. This is a man who genuinely is determined to make a difference as an individual.

This is a very fluid situation. He wants solutions. He wants to make sure that people can live safely in the world. And we’ve seen him, time and time again, make different decisions, have consultations, talk to people nobody thinks he should talk to. He can change his mind. He’s clearly transparent, speaking about what he’s going through and thinking each day. So when I – when we think about what the future will look like, it’s – allow us to do the work that we’re doing right now, focusing on the ceasefire, getting aid into that region, and let the President, who’s determined to deal with all of the issues in that region, come to the fore of what happens next. And we will learn that only from Donald Trump.

All right. So, is this other than the Middle East? Where else are we going?

QUESTION: Middle East.

QUESTION: (Off-mike.)

MS BRUCE: Well, no. This is going – ladies and gentlemen —

QUESTION: (Off-mike.)

MS BRUCE: Ladies and gentlemen, no. No, I’ve said no. Said was it. Now, where are you coming from?

QUESTION: Iran.

MS BRUCE: Iran. All right. We’ll do Iran, sure.

QUESTION: That’s also in the Middle East. (Laughter.)

MS BRUCE: Well, we’re going to do – we’re not – Gaza and otherwise. Let’s move forward, please.

QUESTION: I think there was just confusion because the two-state solution has undergirded U.S. policy for the past several decades. But I understand that that is a question to address to the White House in (inaudible).

MS BRUCE: Yes. Yes, it’s for the White House. It’s for the future. I will not be commenting from this podium today. And this is – again, we’ve got so much more on – let’s just move on, please. Iran?

QUESTION: The question on is Iran is there’s been conflicting messages about whether and where and when a sixth round of talks with Iran may take place. Is there clarity on that from the U.S. perspective?

MS BRUCE: I don’t know if you would consider it clarity – (laughter) – but I can say a few things. The President, I think, he – he said, he noted that something would be happening soon, this week. I think that what I can just reiterate here is that we would hope and expect that there would be new additional talks and that, in fact, they would be soon. But beyond that, I have nothing to preview. But in similar situations, when we believe that it would be soon, it in fact ended up being soon.

QUESTION: Right. The Iranians have completely said Sunday in Oman, so if that is not the U.S. understanding then —

MS BRUCE: Well, I can’t comment on that. Again, the President mentioned a different day. I think that there are individuals involved, obviously, who are working on this and there will be a final determination, and we will hear about it when that determination is made.

QUESTION: Okay. In that context —

QUESTION: Lebanon.

QUESTION: Iran.

QUESTION: In that context, just very quickly —

MS BRUCE: One more follow-up and then we’ll go on.

QUESTION: Can I follow up on that?

QUESTION: Thank you. Just because the President also had mentioned that this Thursday this week would be the sort of two-month deadline for reaching a deal with Iran or not, when is it determined that those talks are a failure and you don’t progress to future rounds?

MS BRUCE: Well, the President makes that determination, and the people involved. As I’ve mentioned before, if you think that – if you think about the deadlines, or even as the Secretary has said on another situation, that it would be a matter of weeks – the funny thing about negotiations and discussions is that things happen and that there are conversations and progress is sometimes made – not tremendous progress, but enough to keep going. So, it is not – it is a dynamic as it would be with any diplomatic consideration, that negotiations are meant to move things forward. And the good news is is that, in fact, it would appear that things are moving forward, and that’s what we all want.

QUESTION: On Iran.

MS BRUCE: All right. Yes, sir.

QUESTION: Thank you, Tammy. Moving to Ukraine, if I may —

MS BRUCE: All right. Now, let’s – one more. Now we’re thinking of Lebanon and the other elements of the Middle East. Did you have something, sir?

QUESTION: Me?

MS BRUCE: Yes, you.

QUESTION: Well, it was – it was an Iran follow, actually.

MS BRUCE: All right. Iran follow-up. All right.

QUESTION: So, President Trump also said something about Iran that was quite interesting yesterday during the roundtable. He said that Iran has been helping with the ceasefire negotiations in Gaza. Are you able to shed any light on that?

MS BRUCE: No, I can’t. Refer you to the White House in that regard. All right.

QUESTION: Lebanon?

QUESTION: Iran?

MS BRUCE: Lebanon? Yes, sir. Right there.

QUESTION: Thank you so much.

MS BRUCE: Yes.

QUESTION: Ukraine has been under massive drone attacks, particularly Kyiv last night. Given that Ukrainian president said publicly that they have been asking for permission from the U.S. to purchase air defense system that they can mitigate Russian attacks, why wouldn’t the U.S. let them purchase air defense system, much-needed air defense systems?

MS BRUCE: Well, I can’t speak to the details of purchase decisions or negotiations about what we’re going to allow to be purchased by an ally. That is the Department of Defense, effectively. What I do know is what the President has said and what the Secretary of State has said in a number of venues, is that we certainly – and we’ve been Ukraine’s biggest supporter and defender, literally – is that we want them to have surface-to-air missile protections, right. We want them to be able to deal with incoming missiles. We know that it’s been discussed about our European partners, who have those systems, to – from us to get them to Ukraine. There’s a number of different negotiations and aspects involved in this kind of dynamic that does not involve the State Department. It’s about munitions and purchasing and all of that.

What I do know is that we are doing and continue to wish to do as much as we can. That is not disputed. And I understand the Ukrainians, who are great friends of this country and have done – there is no disputing the bravery and the commitment of the Ukrainian people. If that was ever in doubt or questionable, this war and how they’ve defended their nation has dispelled any of that. And I had the pleasure of being in a bilat with Ukrainian delegation recently here, and they are astounding people, and they’re remarkable, and they are committed to getting their country safe and this war to end.

And so are we. The United States has proven that. The details of which are many, and I can’t speak to that, and I certainly would dispute that we are not letting Ukraine do something. The opposite has always been the case. Our goal is to make sure that this war comes to an end, and we continue to focus on that.

QUESTION: And Tammy, on that line —

QUESTION: On Lebanon.

QUESTION: I would appreciate if you help us clarify reports that United States has redirected some of the promised defensive weapons from Ukraine – well, supposed to go to Ukraine, but they redirected to the Middle East. Is that accurate?

MS BRUCE: I can’t speak to that. That is not something that – if – whether it is or is not happening, it’s a decision that is clearly one based in national security if it’s happening, and certainly a diplomatic framework that – if a decision has been made, it’s not something that I’m going to remark on here at the podium.

All right.

QUESTION: And can I ask one more?

MS BRUCE: All right, that —

QUESTION: A bigger picture question, Tammy. If there’s —

MS BRUCE: That – no, that’s going to be it.

QUESTION: Thanks.

MS BRUCE: We’re moving along here. I want to get as many people as I can in today.

QUESTION: (Off-mike.)

MS BRUCE: Yes, sir.

QUESTION: (Inaudible) last week, Pakistan’s all-parliamentary delegation, led by Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, was here. Did he have any meeting the State Department? And also has U.S. received any commitment or assurance from Pakistan that they will stop taking – they will take action against terrorists working from –

MS BRUCE: Well, I can tell you that State Department officials, including Under Secretary for Political Affairs Allison Hooker, met with the Pakistani parliamentary delegation during a visit they had to Washington last week. She reiterated U.S. support for the ongoing ceasefire – as you might imagine, thank God – between India and Pakistan. They also discussed important issues to the bilateral relationship, including counterterrorism cooperation. So that meeting occurred. We also know that Deputy Secretary Landau met with the Indian parliamentary delegation last week, and he also reaffirmed the United States strong support of India in the fight against terrorism, and strategic partnership between those two countries.

QUESTION: Did you receive any assurance from Pakistan that they will take action against terrorists?

MS BRUCE: I am not going to discuss the details of those conversations. All right.

QUESTION: (Off-mike.)

MS BRUCE: All right. Yes, ma’am.

QUESTION: Thank you, Tammy. Do you have any updates on the temporary pause on scheduling new interviews for student visa applications? Is that still in effect?

MS BRUCE: I can tell you, of course – and that’s a good question, because there’s so many other conversations about visa restrictions – I do believe that we are in the process – and I don’t know if, Tommy, if we’ve got – we might have to take this back – that we – I know last week that we were in the process of indicating that it would be very soon, and that people should start looking for those spaces to open up regarding appointments. Nothing has changed and are encouraging still people to apply for those student visas. This was a matter of making sure that the process that we were expecting of consulates and embassies was proper when it came to what we expected them to be able to vet for. And that process, we were told, would be rapid, and I think at this point what I can reassert here is that people should watch for those spaces to be open, should continue to apply. This is not going to be a lengthy or an ongoing dynamic. It was meant for a specific, almost an administrative adjustment. And I would hope – perhaps we could go back and get more on this, but I think that that’s where it stands, and perhaps on Thursday I can get even something more specific for you on the record.

QUESTION: Tammy —

MS BRUCE: And another reminder to the people watching at home: When I say we’re going to take something back, it means that we’re going to get an answer to that question for the reporter and get it right back to them as well. And so that’ll also help us for the next briefing also.

QUESTION: Afghanistan —

QUESTION: Tammy.

QUESTION: Ukraine.

QUESTION: Lebanon.

MS BRUCE: Afghanistan. Yes, ma’am. Afghanistan.

QUESTION: (Inaudible) Tammy.

MS BRUCE: Afghanistan.

QUESTION: Thank you, ma’am.

MS BRUCE: Thank you. Let’s keep this in order, please. Let’s go ahead.

QUESTION: Okay. Thank you so much.

MS BRUCE: Thank you.

QUESTION: As you know, Afghanistan’s situation is so critical, but different people, different diplomat like Zal Khalilzad – former ambassador in Iraq and Afghanistan – he has a positive idea. But unfortunately, yesterday, there was a – war started and Taliban claimed that this is from the ISIS. Number one, do you think still ISIS – ISIS is still active in Afghanistan? And my second question: There’s still some Afghan who has SIV and P-1 or P-2 left behind in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran. Do we have any update for them to come to the United States, please?

MS BRUCE: Well, first, I can’t speak right now on the internal dynamic of what’s happening in – any problem between people or claims about ISIS being active and violence that was ensuing, but let’s take that back and see what that is. I do know that the – for the visa restrictions and Afghanistan that there is – for the SIV visas, the proclamation that was used announcing this states that Afghan Special Immigrant Visas are accepted for – I should – let me – I’ll say exempted from the suspension of entry to the United States. Consular processing of Afghan SIVs, including Afghan SIV interviews, continues at U.S. embassies and consulates around the world.

All right.

QUESTION: Tammy —

MS BRUCE: Yes, sir.

QUESTION: Thank you. Me?

QUESTION: Tammy, it’s been two months.

MS BRUCE: Yes, you – yes, sir, you.

QUESTION: Come on, Tammy —

MS BRUCE: Yes, thank you.

QUESTION: — this is not fair.

MS BRUCE: All right, if we’re going to have disruptions, we’re going to – let’s make it – let’s stop this, if we could, Heather.

QUESTION: If you want to kick us out – kick us out (inaudible) —

MS BRUCE: Let’s move, please. Let’s get – we will remove you if you are not silent right now. So we are going to be —

QUESTION: But Tammy, (inaudible).

MS BRUCE: Be respectful to your fellow journalists. And thank you —

QUESTION: (Inaudible.)

MS BRUCE: Thank you very much. Thank you very much.

QUESTION: Yeah. Yeah.

MS BRUCE: Now, we will go. Thank you, sir.

QUESTION: Thank you very much. As you know, the Iraqi federal government has cut the budget and salary of the Kurdistan region. Have you addressed this issue with Baghdad? What is your position on the matter? And I have a —

MS BRUCE: Yes, we’re aware of this. We are aware of this. And we urge Baghdad and Erbil to resolve their issues through constructive dialogue consistent with their constitutional responsibilities. Resolving the salaries issue quickly sends a signal that Iraq is creating an environment in which U.S. companies would want to invest. Successful resolution would also send a positive signal on broader cooperation for the benefit of all Iraqis, such as reopening the Iraq-Türkiye pipeline and additional energy exploration, including with U.S. companies.

When speaking with senior Iraqi officials, such as Prime Minister Sudani, Secretary Rubio has emphasized the importance of stability and prosperity in Iraq and the region. He has done the same in recent meetings and conversations with KRG President Barzani and KRG Prime Minister Masrour Barzani. U.S. support for a strong and resilient Iraqi Kurdistan Region remains a crucial element of our relationship with Iraq.

All right.

QUESTION: (Off-mike.)

MS BRUCE: Yes, all right. Next please. We are – I want – let’s get everyone in if we can here.

QUESTION: We’re – I’m only going to ask one to get everybody. A sanctions question for you. The ICC sanctions that were announced last Thursday – two members of the pretrial chamber that signed off on the arrest warrants for Prime Minister Netanyahu, Defense Minister Gallant were sanctioned, but the presiding judge – the third judge in the pretrial chamber – of France was not sanctioned. What was the reasoning behind sanctioning only two of the three members and not the presiding judge of that chamber?

MS BRUCE: Yeah, again, that obviously was a internal diplomatic decision made very specifically about specific individuals, which I won’t discuss.

QUESTION: So, it was a diplomatic decision?

MS BRUCE: Well, it’s – what – the decisions that go into the nature of when to do a sanction, obviously, there’s a combination of conversations involving national security, what’s in the best interest of the United States, what’s in the best interest of our diplomacy, certainly with our ally Israel, and our own national security and the messages that we send when it comes to expecting America to be treated with respect and to be treated with some modicum of decency when it comes to the international scene. I think that makes that clear. But in the sense of the details of that, of course, I can’t comment on that here.

QUESTION: Thank you, Tammy.

MS BRUCE: All right. Yes, sir, at the end here.

QUESTION: I have a question about foreign aid. Would you be able to share any update on the status of PEPFAR? I understand Secretary Rubio said last month in his hearing before the Senate that 85 percent of the program is operational, but now some activists and congressional Democrats are disputing that.

MS BRUCE: I do have something for you here. Just for some clarity, Secretary Rubio referenced an estimated 85 percent of beneficiaries who could be receiving lifesaving treatment and prevention of mother-to-child transmission services based on the full operational capacity of all the operational active awards is – it’s 85 percent. That is a correct number. That is as of March 24th, 2025.

All right, good.

QUESTION: On this issue?

MS BRUCE: Oh wait, wait.

QUESTION: Lebanon?

MS BRUCE: Well, hold on.

QUESTION: As far as this cable that went out today to – from Secretary Rubio instructing all chiefs of mission to abolish all USAID positions, global – either direct U.S. hires or local employees and some contractors?

MS BRUCE: Sure. That was not a surprise. It shouldn’t surprise anyone. A cable is something sent out from the State Department, in this case of course to missions worldwide, instructing them to do something, essentially. There’s many more uses and reasons for cables. And sometimes, surprisingly, said no one ever, they get leaked.

In this case it was an order regarding positions regarding USAID, that they were to be ended, and that was something that was previewed in February when we relayed the roadmap, if you will, of the reorganization, the renovation, if you will, of USAID, making sure that our aid efforts around the world met with what was important to the United States, to the America First agenda.

So, this was a cable telling the – our posts exactly what they were expecting to be told, which is that those positions were gone and were being eliminated. So, it wasn’t a surprise, it’s nothing new, and it is exactly what we previewed in February and March of this year.

All right. We’ve talked to you. Yes, all right. Now, in the back, young man right there. Yes. Young man without the tie. That would be you, yes.

QUESTION: No tie. Yeah, I just – while we have questions on Israel, earlier today, five countries —

MS BRUCE: Can you tell me, by the way, what is your outlet? Just curiosity. And your name?

QUESTION: Yes, ma’am. Ryan Morgan with The Epoch Times.

MS BRUCE: All right. Hi, Ryan. Welcome aboard.

QUESTION: Thank you for having me. So I was just wondering if you have a quick comment about the five countries that sanctioned Israeli ministers Itamar Ben-Gvir and Bezalel Smotrich today.

MS BRUCE: Yes, I do. I have something for you on that, and let me – let me get that for you. There’s just so much going on today.

First of all, we find that extremely unhelpful. It will do nothing to get us closer to a ceasefire in Gaza. This, again, is about allied sanctions against Israeli ministers. They should focus on – this being UK, Canada, Norway, and New Zealand – should focus on the real culprit, which is Hamas. Hamas put the people of Gaza in this situation by launching the horrific attacks of October 7th which killed six British citizens and 46 Americans and continue to hold hostages, of course, including the bodies of four Americans.

We remain concerned about any step that would further isolate Israel from the international community. If our allies want to help, they should focus on supporting Special Envoy Witkoff’s negotiations and backing the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation when it comes to food and aid.

All right.

QUESTION: Thank you.

MS BRUCE: Yes, sir, in the back. Yes, sir.

QUESTION: Thank you, Tammy. My question is about Ukraine negotiations. Russians and Ukrainians came together in Istanbul last weekend. They announced a memorandum, and result of that there was exchange of prisoners. What is your elaboration on that phase of the deal, and how do you follow these negotiations?

MS BRUCE: Well, the President and the Secretary have been saying for a while that the only real solution can come with the parties talking directly, and that is what we’ve been seeing here at least in this regard. And we, of course, remain in close contact with both parties at the highest levels. And we welcomed the success, the movement of, again, more prisoner exchanges – in this case, of course, the seriously wounded and young prisoners under the age of 25 – as well as repatriating fallen soldiers, which in that instance was about 6,000 each, horribly.

The – we are not involved, right? We’re not involved in that as the State Department, if that was your question, or the United States. This was negotiations, conversations between the two parties involved, and that’s all I can tell you is that we welcome that progress in the meantime.

QUESTION: Are you in contact with the Turkish authorities in order to have them involved in some way to reach a deal between the two parties?

MS BRUCE: Well, I obviously won’t speak on – we talk with all of our allies for – on a number of different reasons all the time, but I won’t discuss what the details are of those conversations.

Yes, sir.

QUESTION: Thank you, Tammy. A question on Iran. When do you expect Iran to get back to you about your proposal? And President spoke to Fox and he said, “Iran is acting much differently in negotiations than it did just days ago.” What’s changed from Iran from recent days?

MS BRUCE: Well, I don’t speak for Iran, and I think that what we will find is, as we’ve discussed, the expectation of further talks. And those leading those talks and handling the situation I would hope, as we all do, that we can finally have some answers and some agreement when it comes to the situation.

QUESTION: A follow-up?

QUESTION: A follow-up on Iraq. You said that you are encouraging both Erbil and Baghdad, the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and Baghdad, to solve the issue over the budget. Are you engaging with them? There are reports that recently the U.S. chargé d’affaires to the Iraq Embassy in Baghdad, he met with the Iraqi prime minister, and he put direct pressure on Iraqi prime minister to solve this issue. Now the Iraqi officials are saying that we are getting heated from the Washington to solve this issue. Do you have any updates on that?

MS BRUCE: Well, I’ve – in my previous answer to this, it’s clear, even from this podium, we’re expressing what we expect to see. And they know what we think, and we’ve been saying it over and over again. It’s not – I’m not going to speak on rumors or single reports or somebody talking about a chargé d’affaires or an ambassador and what they’re talking about and who they’re meeting. That’s not going to happen here. But we here have made it very clear that this is a situation that has to stop. And we know that, of course, as I’ve noted, that resolving situations like this will entice more companies to get involved in the area, making everyone’s lives in the region better.

All right. Yes, sir, in the back. It was – behind the man with no tie. Behind our friend with no tie. Yes, sir, go ahead.

QUESTION: Hi.

QUESTION: I should not wear the tie, then. Right?

MS BRUCE: Now you’re – you have a tie on. That would be you. Yes. (Laughter.) No, no, you – you, sir. You. Yes.

QUESTION: Me? Oh, thank you so much.

MS BRUCE: You. Yes, yes.

QUESTION: Thank you very much.

MS BRUCE: Too many with no ties these days. All right. No offense to the no-tie wearers.

QUESTION: Thank you so much, Tammy.

QUESTION: I have a tie.

QUESTION: So actually, after the – (laughter). After the ceasefire between India and Pakistan, President Trump offered to mediate on the issue of Indian-held Kashmir. I was just wondering what kind of follow-up we are expecting, like how State Department move forward, like inviting the leadership of both the countries or, like, going to support UN Security Council resolution on Kashmir?

MS BRUCE: Well, I – obviously, I can’t speak to what’s on the mind or the plans of the President. What I do know is that I think we all recognize that President Trump in each step that he takes, it’s made to solve generational differences between countries, generational war. So it doesn’t – it shouldn’t surprise anyone that he’d want to manage something like that. He seems very much to be – and not just seems but he is – has been the only one to bring certain people to the table to have conversations that nobody thought was possible.

So, while I can’t speak to his plans, the world knows his nature, and I can’t speak to any details of what he might have in that regard. You can call the White House. I have a feeling they would have plenty to say. But it is an exciting time that if we can get to a point in that particular conflict, thank God but also thank Secretary Rubio and President Trump and the Vice President. It is – it’s a very interesting time. And so it’s – every day brings something new, and I hope perhaps something like that can also get resolved before the President —

QUESTION: Keeping – yes, keeping Americans safe is a top priority of this administration. Now, an American citizen, Gurpatwant Singh Pannun, has wrote a letter to Secretary Blinken demanding to put sanctions on Indian agents involved in the assassination attempt. Did you get that letter? What is your opinion?

MS BRUCE: Well, if that’s – that’s something I can’t speak on, but let’s take that back and we’ll go – we’ll go on from there.

All right, now. You’ve – I’ve already spoken to some of you with your hands up. Yes, sir, in the blue top.

QUESTION: (Off-mike.)

MS BRUCE: No, behind you. No, in the glasses, sir.

QUESTION: Okay. Thank you, Tammy.

MS BRUCE: Yes.

QUESTION: As you know very well, new South Korean President Lee Jae-myung is pursuing a pragmatic foreign policy, which regards the alliance with the United States as the very foundation of his foreign policy. But pragmatic policy also signals an openness to stably managed relations with China. So do you have any comment on the new South Korean Government’s foreign policy stance?

MS BRUCE: Well, I don’t. What I can tell you is that there was a call between the President and President Jae-myung Lee. We can confirm that that phone call in fact took place, and we refer you to the White House for those details. And we congratulate the president on his election as the president of the Republic of Korea, and we are confident under his leadership that our alliance will continue to thrive. And again, for more – perhaps further comment if you’d like to know President Trump’s view of that, I’d suggest you call the White House.

All right, now in the back. It’s going to be our last question here. To you, sir.

QUESTION: Thank you.

MS BRUCE: In a nice white crisp shirt and a tie, and glasses and – (laughter) – it’s our sartorial remarks here today, apparently.

QUESTION: Thank you. Thank you, Tammy, for giving me the opportunity ask – to ask you a question.

MS BRUCE: Yes, sir. And your outlet again, sir?

QUESTION: I work for France 24 and Asharq Al-Awsat newspaper.

MS BRUCE: Very good. Welcome aboard.

QUESTION: My question is about Lebanon. There were reports yesterday that there – that the U.S. is engaging Israel in some discussions about the fate of UNIFIL. Would you please shed some light on what do you think regarding the situation of UNIFIL in southern Lebanon, and what do you expect from UNIFIL and from the Lebanese Government? And also, I have a question whether you could – you would confirm that Ambassador Tom Barrack will visit Lebanon next week. Thank you.

MS BRUCE: All right. Well, for the first part of that, we’ll have to take all of that back. I know that quite some time ago we discussed this here at the podium, but as we also know, time changes things and I want to make sure – I don’t want to repeat to you the nature of what we were saying months ago. So, let’s go back and we’ll get – we’ll get those answers there.

Regarding Ambassador Barrack, he is of course our ambassador to Türkiye and he is leading the way in our effort regarding Syria and getting Syria – giving them a chance to make a difference and to move into the future.

I also – I think we can get a good answer from the ambassador about his plans regarding any travel. I will do my best for you in that regard. And – but that’s – he’s a busy guy. We had him here last week. He spoke to many here in general, off the record, for, like, a meet and greet. But he is a man who clearly is making a huge difference. We expect more from him. And we’ll get back to you with his travel plans and —

QUESTION: A quick follow-up —

MS BRUCE: All right, sure.

QUESTION: — on the fate of Ms. Morgan Ortagus. Because there are a lot of rumors in Lebanon and in the region —

MS BRUCE: Well, that – boy, I can see myself answering this question.

QUESTION: Yeah.

MS BRUCE: Said no one ever.

QUESTION: But I know you answered without answering the question before. But could you put an end to those rumors?

MS BRUCE: Well, I’ll be – I will not answer without not answering. No, first of all, I will not speak about personnel dynamics. I’m certainly not going to address rumors surrounding those – any personnel dynamics here regarding anyone. And I’m going to leave it at that.

All right, thank you, everyone. Great job. I’ll see you on Thursday. Thank you very much.

(The briefing was concluded at 3:08 p.m.)

# # #