In his first 100 days, Secretary of State Marco Rubio has implemented a decisive and focused America First foreign policy agenda, in partnership with key agencies. The accomplishments below are organized by six pillars of the Trump Administration’s priorities.

“Every dollar we spend, every program we fund, every policy we pursue must be justified by the answer to one of three questions: Does it make America safer? Does it make America stronger? Or does it make America more prosperous?” — Secretary Rubio

1. Delivering an America First Foreign Policy

Reorganizing the State Department: Created a plan for the U.S. State Department to ensure the Department can better perform its essential diplomatic mission and advance America’s core national interests in the 21st Century.

Foreign Aid Done Right: Terminated various foreign assistance-funded grants and contracts, across USAID and State Department, inconsistent with administration priorities with total value exceeding $80 billion. Oversaw an 85 percent cut of USAID programs, with the goal of refocusing taxpayer dollars with our national and strategic interests. Began the process of transferring remaining USAID programs, which align with the administration’s priorities.

Securing the Release of Detained Americans: Secured the release of dozens of Americans unjustly detained in multiple countries including Afghanistan, Russia, Belarus, and Venezuela through high-level diplomatic efforts.

Deterring China’s Presence in our Region: Advanced President Trump’s America First policy by rebuilding relationships and partnering with key allies in our neighborhood. Thanks to Secretary Rubio’s efforts, which included his first international trip, Panama made the monumental decision to leave China’s Belt and Road Initiative. Other nations, including El Salvador, Mexico, and Costa Rica, have taken meaningful steps away from China and toward the United States.

Revoking Visas When Threats Arise: Implemented President Trump’s zero-tolerance approach to foreign visitors who abet terrorist organizations or participate in activities that threaten our national security or foreign policy interests.

Ending ‘X Gender’ U.S. Passports: Eliminated ‘X’ as an available sex marker on U.S. passports, which are now issued based on an individual’s sex at birth.

One Flag Policy: Implemented that only the flag of the United States of America is authorized to be flown or displayed at U.S. facilities, both domestic and abroad, and featured in U.S. government content, with exceptions made for the Prisoner of War/Missing in Action (POW/MIA) emblem and the Wrongful Detainees Flag, both of which are included in statute.

Championing Free Speech: Shuttered the Counter Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference Hub (R-FIMI), which cost taxpayers more than $50 million per year, and actively censored the voices of Americans.

Withdrawing from the Paris Climate Agreement: Issued memo to immediately initiate formal withdrawal from the Paris Agreement in accordance with President Trump’s executive order .

Streamlining Defense Cooperation: Streamlined defense cooperation to invigorate the American industrial base, strengthen U.S. supply chains, and advance technological development. This will advance U.S. competitiveness abroad.

USA Pavilion at Expo 2025 Osaka : Inaugurated the 31,000 square-foot USA Pavilion at Expo 2025 Osaka, reinforcing our commitment to shaping the future of the Indo-Pacific and demonstrating American excellence, innovation, leadership, and opportunities to visitors from around the world. The USA Pavilion welcomed more than 60,000 visitors during Expo 2025 Osaka’s opening week, 12 percent of the half-million total visitors to the Expo site during the same period.

Protecting Women’s Sports: Reaffirmed that the State Department will protect girls and women in academic and professional-level sports. In accordance with that priority, the Department will not issue visas for biological men entering the U.S. to compete in women’s sports and will not provide funding for or take part in cultural exchange programs that allow biological men to participate in women’s sports. Women are the only ones who belong in female sports.

Fastest Pace of State Department Nominees in Decades: Over 30 of President Trump’s nominees have completed or scheduled their hearings with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The fastest confirmation process since 2001 has enabled the Department to hit the ground running. We are committed to advancing an America First foreign policy agenda on behalf of the American people.