Let's say you're headed to Washington D.C. to check out the sights, visit some museums and monuments, and, if possible, tour the White House. Can it be done?
The answer is: It depends.
You're going to have to first jump through some preparatory hoops in order to see whether you can make it happen and, even then, it's not guaranteed. This is, after all, a working White House — the seat of the executive branch, as well as the president's residence, and there are scheduling issues, security measures and even weather to take into account.
Here's a rundown of how you might go about getting to see the mansion and the grounds:
Why would I want to see the White House anyway?
Along with the U.S. Capitol where Congress meets and the Supreme Court building opposite the Capitol, the White House, at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, is the structure at the center of American governance, a place where presidents have signed laws, addressed the nation, entertained foreign dignitaries, negotiated treaties, etc.
George Washington selected the site and presidents since John Adams have lived there since 1800 — save for a period after the British burned down the residence in the War of 1812 and it had to be rebuilt.
Inside, there are ornate dining and meeting rooms, fine art, gilded furnishings, not to mention a couple centuries of pomp, circumstance and history. And outside, there are gardens. You probably won't get to see the president or his family, of course, but you will see a lot.
How do I book a tour?
Paradoxically, this isn't done through the White House but through members of Congress. So, in order to ask to get on a tour, you have to contact either one of your two U.S. senators or the member of the U.S. House of Representatives who represents the congressional district you live in.
If you don't know who they are, you can go online to www.congress.gov/members and fill out the box in the middle of the screen below "How to Contact Your Member." That will provide you links and numbers to your senators and representatives' offices; if you look around on their sites, you'll typically (though not always) find a link or form through which you can request a White House tour.
You can also call the Capitol switchboard at 202-224-3121 (TTY: 202-225-1904) and find your member that way.
What if I'm not a U.S. citizen?
You'll need to run it through the embassy of the nation you're visiting from. (The State Department has a list at https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/consularnotification/ConsularNotificationandAccess.html.)
What will I need to know to book a tour?
You will need to know how many people you're bringing and the dates (preferably multiple ones) when you would like to tour the White House but here's a couple of caveats to that: Tour requests typically must be submitted in advance of the date you're hoping to visit the White House and there seems to be a bit of a contradiction into how far in advance. (Welcome to Washington!)
The White House says the request must be made seven to 90 days ahead of the visit; the National Park Service (which has no hand in scheduling or offering White House tours but does operate the neighboring White House Visitors Center which contains dozens of presidential artifacts and also knows a thing or two about handling visitors) says the request is a tighter window of 21 to 90 days before the visit.
Everyone seems to agree that you should try to arrange a tour earlier than later as at certain times of the year, the spots get filled up quickly. And as for getting a specific time on one of your preferable days, you likely won't have much say in the matter.
Tours typically are only available 7:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. Tuesday through Thursday and 7:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. Friday through Saturday, according to the White House, and they're typically not available on federal holidays. Sometimes, depending on the White House scheduling, the hours are extended but the flip side of that is scheduling conflicts that arise suddenly or inclement weather (remember part of this tour is on the grounds outside) can result in tours being canceled even after they've been confirmed.
When you contact your member of Congress or embassy, you'll also need to provide emails where tour updates will be sent from the White House (more on this below).
How much does a White House tour cost?
Nada. The tour is free.
What does the White House tour include?
This is a self-guided tour that takes most guests 45 minutes to an hour. It generally includes the public rooms in the East Wing (which is where the first lady has her offices) and in the residence, which is the first floor and ground floor of the main building of the White House.
As such, it includes, on the ground floor, the Vermeil Room (with its portraits of first ladies), the library, and the China Room (think plates, cups and silverware, not the country), and, on the main floor, the Blue Room and Red Room and the state Dining Room.
What is not on the White House tour?
Off-limits is the working part of the White House, otherwise known as the West Wing, which is where the Oval Office — the president's chief office — is located, as are offices for the vice president, the chief of staff and the press secretary (as well as the briefing room you've seen on cable TV). You also won't see the upper floors of the residence, which is where the president and his family reside, meaning you won't see the Lincoln Bedroom either.
So once I book my White House tour, we're in?
Not exactly. As cautioned earlier, no tours are guaranteed and they can be canceled at the last minute. We'll come back to that in a second.
Once you contact your member of Congress or an embassy if you're a foreign traveler, they will submit your request to the White House, which will send you a secure RSVP link requiring your personal information and those of your fellow visitors: That means name, address, date of birth, Social Security number (and perhaps more) for everyone in your party, regardless of age. You'll typically have a short time — a matter of a few days at most — to provide all that info.
There's no adding or substituting members of your party after that either.
Then a short time, a week or two generally, before your tour, you should receive confirmation as to whether you're in.
If you've made it this far, remember you need to bring ID with you (unless you're under the age of 17, in which case you also have to be accompanied by an adult guardian) and that the info on the ID (must be a Real ID-compliant driver's license or a passport, according to the White House) must match what was given on the RSVP link.
Where does the White House tour start?
At the intersection of 15th Street NW and Alexander Hamilton Place (southeast of the White House and behind the Treasury Building) and the White House advises you get there at least 15 minutes before the scheduled tour time; late visitors may not be admitted.
Also, as there isn't much public parking around the White House, you may want to take the Metro (the Federal Triangle or McPherson Square stops are closest) and if using rideshare, get dropped off at the White House Visitor Center at 1450 Pennsylvania Ave., NW. (It's one block away.)
What can I bring with me to the White House tour?
It's more like what you can't bring. No food or drinks are allowed. Umbrellas are fine but not if they have a metal tip. You can bring a camera with a fixed lens but no flash photography or video recording is permitted. Cellphones are permitted but they need to be silenced. And no calls please. Baby carriers worn on the body are OK but not strollers (though it is wheelchair accessible). No bags of any kind are permitted, meaning no backpacks, no purses, no fanny packs. Service animals and medical items are allowed but no signs, laptops, tablets. No tobacco. And it should go without saying, no weapons, no knives, no ammunition, nothing that could be perceived as a threat of any kind.
Also: There's no storage. If you show up with something prohibited, neither you nor it are getting in.
What else should I know about White House tours?
One: Don't touch the furnishings, art or other objects in the White House. And you're advised to download the White House Experience App in advance. (That way, its data is stored on your device and it can be used without WiFi or internet service after that.) You can get it at https://www.whitehousehistory.org/digital-library/projects/enhancements-for-white-house-experience-app.)
Oh and one other thing: The White House has something like three dozen bathrooms but none are open to the public as part of a tour and the closest is some distance away at the visitors center, so plan accordingly.
Contact Todd Spangler: tspangler@freepress.com. Follow him on X @tsspangler.
This article originally appeared on Detroit Free Press: How to visit the White House: Price, tour info, more