Senate Majority Leader John Thune (R-S.D.) says it is his “hope” that the Senate passes legislation to place tough sanctions on Russia by the August recess through a bipartisan proposal sponsored by President Trump ally Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.).
Senate Republicans are feeling more confident about passing Russia sanctions legislation this month after Trump criticized Russian President Vladimir Putin this week for stepping up attacks on Ukrainian cities.
“I hope that we can get it on the floor before the August recess,” Thune told reporters Wednesday. “We are working with the administration, with the House to try and get it in a form where it’s ready.”
“Obviously, there’s a tremendous amount of bipartisan support here in the Senate. I think that’s shared in the House of Representatives, at least I hope that it is. The White House is very engaged in trying to get it in a form that we can transact and [get] across the floor of the Senate,” he added. “Whether that happens in the next couple of weeks is a bit of an open question, but I’m hopeful that it can.”
The Sanctioning Russia Act of 2025, which Graham introduced with Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) would impose primary and secondary sanctions on Russia and countries that purchase Russian oil, gas, uranium and other products.
It would impose a 500 percent tariff on imported goods from any countries that purchase sanctioned Russian products.
Graham said the legislation would give Trump “a waiver” to exempt certain imports and exports from sanctions.
“The real focus of the bill is to hit the customers of Putin. China and India buy 70 percent of Russian oil and gas and other petroleum products. I’ve always believed the way this war ends is when China goes to Putin and says, ‘Enough already, you’re hurting us now,’” he said.
Graham said he hopes the sanctions bill could make it to the Senate floor as soon as next week.
Speaker Mike Johnson (R-La.) told reporters earlier Wednesday that he is open to looking at the legislation.
“I don’t know any details yet but I know there’s an interest in that in the House side, so we’ll have to see,” Johnson told reporters in the Capitol when asked about the Senate bill.
“Vladimir Putin has shown an unwillingness to be reasonable and to talk seriously about brokering a peace, and I think we have to send them a message, that’s my view,” he added.