Chairman Guthrie Announces Full Committee Hearing on AI and American Global Competitiveness
WASHINGTON, D.C. – Today, Congressman Brett Guthrie (KY-02), Chairman of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, announced a full committee hearing titled Converting Energy into Intelligence: the Future of AI Technology, Human Discovery, and American Global Competitiveness.
“American innovators have imagined and built many of the most impactful technologies of the last 250 years. By turning energy into intelligence, AI represents our next chance to lead the world and create a generation of growth and prosperity. In order to meet this moment, it’s critical that we invest in the right infrastructure needed to meet AI’s demands, including producing more baseload electricity, building advanced networks, and producing next generation semiconductors. We also need to understand how the federal government can facilitate further developments in computing power and AI modeling, all while ensuring we have the right guardrails in place to protect consumers,” said Chairman Guthrie. “This flagship hearing will highlight some of the most influential voices in the industry, as we work to make sure the United States is prepared to seize this once-in-a-generation opportunity.”
Full Committee on Energy and Commerce hearing titled Converting Energy into Intelligence: the Future of AI Technology, Human Discovery, and American Global Competitiveness
WHAT: Full Committee hearing on AI and American Global Competitiveness
DATE: Wednesday, April 9, 2025
TIME: 10:00 AM ET
LOCATION: 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
This notice is at the direction of the Chairman. The hearing will be open to the public and press and will be live streamed online at energycommerce.house.gov. If you have any questions concerning the hearing, please contact Kaitlyn Peterson with the Committee staff at Kaitlyn.Peterson@mail.house.gov. If you have any press-related questions, please contact Matthew VanHyfte at Matthew.VanHyfte@mail.house.gov.
###