Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-Ga.) lashed out at the Department of Justice (DOJ) and FBI on Wednesday over their memo saying disgraced financier and convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein did not leave behind a “client list” after dying in prison in 2019.
“I think the Department of Justice and the FBI has more explaining to do — this is Jeffrey Epstein,” Greene said in an interview on the Real America’s Voice network, where her partner is the chief White House correspondent.
“This is the most famous pedophile in modern-day history, and people are absolutely not going to accept just a memo that was written that says there is no client list.”
BestReviews is reader-supported and may earn an affiliate commission.
Amazon Prime Day Deals
Attorney General Pam Bondi said earlier this year that the Epstein client list was on her desk. She explained this week that she was referring more generally to files related to the case.
President Trump admonished reporters Tuesday who asked about the new memo, which sought to quell conspiracy theories about Epstein’s associates and his cause of death. The DOJ released video footage Tuesday that Bondi said confirmed that Epstein died by suicide in a New York City prison cell while awaiting trial on sex trafficking charges.
“You still talking about Jeffrey Epstein? This guy’s been talked about for years,” the president said to a reporter during a Cabinet meeting at the White House. “I can’t believe you’re asking a question on Epstein at a time like this, where we’re having some of the greatest success and also tragedy with what happened in Texas — it just seems like a desecration.”
Trump hobnobbed with Epstein in decades past, as part of elite social circles in Manhattan, where Trump centered his prepresidency business empire, and Palm Beach, Fla., where the president’s Mar-a-Lago luxury resort is located. Trump has maintained that the two men had a falling out before revelations around Epstein’s sex crimes.
“I haven’t spoken to him in 15 years,” Trump told reporters in June 2019 during his first presidency, after Epstein was arrested. “I was not a fan of his — that I can tell you.”
Greene was among a chorus of MAGA figures who tore into the administration’s final determination Tuesday.
Greene claimed Wednesday that British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell, an Epstein confidante found guilty in a child sex trafficking case in 2021, requested that “her own little black book be kept private and secret that had over 2,000 names in it of famous celebrities, world leaders, foreign leaders and very rich businessmen.”
“So, we are not accepting the fact that there is no so-called client list or a group of people that may have been blackmailed by Jeffrey Epstein, given with evidence that he had gathered on them with these horrific activities,” Greene said.