Congress Leader Ajay Rai's Rafale Mockery Draws Pakistani Media's Attention, BJP Backlash
Congress leader Ajay Rai's remark drew massive criticism. BJP leader CR Kesavan said that Congress leaders are deliberately trying to defame and demoralise our brave armed forces.
Hours after Uttar Pradesh Congress President Ajay Rai took a dig at the BJP-led central government over the Pahalgam terror attack, mocking it with a toy Rafale, a Pakistani news outlet highlighted his remark.
Rai on Sunday, while speaking to media, displayed a toy Rafale plane with “nimbu mirchi" (lemon and chillies) hung on it, a traditional sign believed to ward off the evil eye.
Recommended Stories
“Terrorist activities have increased in the country, and people are suffering from it. Our youth lost their lives in the Pahalgam terror attack. But this government, which talks a lot, says that they will crush terrorists — they brought Rafale, but they are in their hangars having chilly and lemon hanging in them. When will they take action against terrorists, those who support them, and their backers?," said Rai.
A Pakistani media outlet, ARY News, covered his remark by sharing pictures of Defence Minister Rajnath Singh with the Rafale and Ajay Rai holding the toy Rafale. The anchor in the clip was also heard highlighting Rai’s remark.
#WATCH | Varanasi | Uttar Pradesh Congress President Ajay Rai shows a ‘toy plane’ with Rafale written on it and lemon-chillies hanging in it.Ajay Rai says, “Terrorist activities have increased in the country, and people are suffering from it. Our youth lost their lives in the… pic.twitter.com/wIwLsa4akD
— ANI (@ANI) May 4, 2025
‘It Shows Menatity Of INDI Alliance’: BJP Hits Back At Ajay Rai
The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) attacked Congress leader Ajay Rai over his remark over the Pahalgam attack. While addressing a press conference, BJP national spokesperson Sudhanshu Trivedi said, “Ajay Rai is making fun of rafale and it shows the real face and mentality of the INDIA alliance."
Further referring to Rai hanging “nimbu-mirchi" on the toy Rafale, he said, “They are trying to demoralising the morale of our forces. Not only that they are making fun of our Hindu culture and rituals, where we use this ritual to protect from evil eyes."
“We are stronger than Pakistan on every front except that their leaders don’t speak against Pakistan and we have our parties here who are always in support of Pakistan. If they have any doubt on the surgical strike INDI alliance leaders should see the statements made in the Pakistan assembly by their leaders," added the BJP leader.
On the Pakistani news outlet covering Rai’s remark, Trivedi said, “After Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, Congress candidate from Kashi, Ajay Rai has become the toast of the Pakistani media, speaking their language and mocking the Indian Armed Forces. The Congress has no shortage of such nincompoops, and the rot begins with the Gandhis."
Meanwhile, Andhra Pradesh BJP President Vishnu Vardhan Reddy also shared the clip of the Pakistani media outlet and lashed out at Rai, calling it “disgraceful".
“Well done, Congress leader @kashikirai— your baseless attacks on Rafale have now earned you prime time coverage in Pakistan. You’ve not just mocked India’s defense capabilities, you’ve handed propaganda material to our enemies. Truly disgraceful," the BJP leader wrote on X.
Well done, Congress leader @kashikirai — your baseless attacks on Rafale have now earned you prime time coverage in Pakistan.You’ve not just mocked India’s defense capabilities, you’ve handed propaganda material to our enemies.
Truly disgraceful. pic.twitter.com/31hHXPo5li
— Vishnu Vardhan Reddy (@SVishnuReddy) May 5, 2025
Earlier on Sunday, BJP National Spokesperson Shehzad Poonawalla questioned why Congress was continuously attacking the morale of the armed forces.
“Why is a continuous attack being made on the morale of armed forces?…Congress party is not taking action because Pakistan ko kehna bhaijaan, sena ka karna apman, ye Congress ki bann chuki hai pehchan, Pakistan aur Congress do shareer aur bole ek hi zubaan (Congress party is not taking action because Pakistan is their dear brother while the army is being insulted, and this Congress’s identity is that it is a partner to Pakistan and speaks their language)," he added.
Congress Leader Ajay Rai Issues Clarification
A day after his remark sparked backlash and was covered by a Pakistani media outlet, Congress leader Ajay Rai issued a clarification.
He said that the people of the country want action against the attack, adding that people were being “misled."
“People who support terrorism should be brought to justice….People are being misled. I visited with Rahul Gandhi to the residence of the deceased family…everyone is asking when the government will take action."
Pahalgam Terror Attack
A terrorist attack in Jammu-Kashmir’s Pahalgam left 26 dead, including 25 tourists and one local. India took several strong measures against Pakistan in the backdrop of the attack. Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Sunday assured action against the terrorists and said, “it is my responsibility to give a befitting reply to those who dare to attack our country."