What is the fake claim about?
According to a PIB Fact Check post on social media X, the fraudulent website is making false claims, stating that "long queues form at ATMs after PM Narendra Modi unveiled his new project that enables people to earn up to 10,000 local rupees per day."
How to check your CIBIL Score: A step-by-step guide to monitor your credit score
"Thousands of Indians have already earned between Rs 80,000 and Rs 350,000 in their first month," the fraudulent website further claims, attributing the project to PM Modi, as per the PIB Fact Check post.
The government of India has not made any such announcement, and no such project exists, the PIB Fact Check post clarified. "This sensational headline is designed to lure people into sharing their personal and financial information. However, this is entirely false," it said.
Popular in Wealth
PIB Fact Check's warning
The PIB Fact Check team, a trusted government initiative to combat misinformation, has issued a clear warning about this scam. They have stamped the claim as fake and urged citizens to be cautious. Sharing personal or financial information on such websites can lead to identity theft, financial loss, or other forms of fraud.
The PIB emphasizes:
" Do NOT share your personal or financial details on suspicious websites.
" Always verify claims through official government sources before taking action.
How to identify fake government websites?
Here are simple ways to cross-check if it is a government website announcing any new scheme or project, according to the Delhi cybercrime website.
1. If you come across a website providing government jobs, financial perks, subsidies, and so on that appears to be deceptively similar to a government website, please check the website's credentials.
2. You may contact the parent government department or Tweet to PIB Fact Check @PIBFactCheck regarding verification of any government portal.
3. Remember, websites having the extension '.gov.in' are genuine government websites. Other sites having extensions '.in' or '.org' and posing as government websites may be viewed with suspicion, and their credentials may be verified before making any financial transactions or sharing personal information.
4. A website with official emblems, such as 'Áshoka' or 'Swachch Bharat', does not necessarily indicate a government site. Use additional means to check the site's credentials.
5. A legitimate government site will contain several cross-references on government websites, social media posts, and so on, whereas a fake government site will not be referenced to in other government portals.