News Releases
Feb 11 2025
WASHINGTON – U.S. Senators Jerry Moran (R-Kan.) and John Hoeven (R-N.D.) – members of the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry – joined Representatives Tracey Mann (KS-01), Rick Crawford (AR-01), Dan Newhouse (WA-04), David Rouzer (NC-07) and House Agriculture Committee Chairman G.T. Thompson (PA-15), in introducing legislation to move the administration of the Food for Peace Program from the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
For the past 70 years, American farmers have helped combat international hunger through Food for Peace, feeding more than 4 billion people in more than 150 countries.
“Kansas has a long history of providing food to the hungry beginning with a Kansas farmer suggesting the U.S. provide surplus grain to countries in need, to President Eisenhower establishing the resulting humanitarian aid program, to Senator Bob Dole expanding Food for Peace, to the farmers who grow the crops that feed the world,” said Sen. Moran. “As part of an ongoing effort to save money and increase efficiency, Food for Peace should be moved to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. By moving this program closer to the producers who grow these crops, we can help reduce waste and make certain our farmers have access to this valuable market. Food stability is essential to political stability, and our food aid programs help feed the hungry, bolster our national security and provide important markets for our farmers.”
“Our nation’s farmers and ranchers are the best in the world and work hard to provide food and fuel not only for our nation, but those in need across the globe,” said Sen. Hoeven. “The U.S. Department of Agriculture already administer U.S. farmer-based food aid programs and it only makes sense that USDA would oversee the Food for Peace program, as well.”
“President Trump made a promise to the country to cut wasteful spending, reduce overbearing federal bureaucracy, and to ensure every taxpayer dollar was spent wisely and responsibly,” said Rep. Mann. “I applaud President Trump for upholding that promise and reviewing our federal spending line by line to root out waste, fraud, and abuse while ensuring programs like Food for Peace are in line with his mission and vision. For 70 years, Kansas and American farmers have played an active role in sending their commodities to feed malnourished and starving populations around the world. This free gift from the American people is more than food. It’s diplomacy and feeds the most vulnerable communities while helping them recognize the freedom, prosperity, and good America can establish across the globe. By moving Food for Peace to USDA, the program can continue to equip American producers to serve hungry people while providing more transparency and efficiency as to how taxpayer dollars are stewarded. I will continue to work with the Trump Administration to uproot wasteful spending while ensuring America can continue to be the beacon of hope and freedom we are to the rest of the world.”
“Food for Peace is a critical program for American farmers and has a proven track-record of successfully feeding people all over the world,” said Rep. Crawford. “I am encouraged by the Trump Administration taking a fresh look at how we provide foreign assistance, including Food for Peace. I believe a move from USAID to USDA would make program administration more efficient and more in-line with America’s priorities. USDA already runs two international food assistance programs that deal with in-kind food donations, Food for Progress and the McGovern-Dole Food for Education program. This makes USDA a natural home for Food for Peace.”
“The Food for Peace program plays a critical role in helping prevent starvation in places around the world that need it most, while also providing American farmers additional market opportunities,” said Rep. Newhouse. “Moving this program from USAID to USDA allows a commodity-focused agency to manage and execute the program’s mission while ensuring accountability that funds will be spent responsibly. America must continue to be a global leader in the fight against hunger.”
Last week, Sen. Moran urged Secretary of State Marco Rubio to quickly ship and distribute the American-grown food that was stalled in ports and warehouses in the U.S. and around the world as a result of the State Department’s pause on international assistance. Nearly $560 million worth of American-grown food was at risk of spoiling. On February 8, the State Department provided notices to participating aid organizations to resume shipping and distribution of the stalled American-grown food aid.
Statements of Support:
"Kansas farmers take great pride in Food for Peace and the impact the program and American commodities have had on feeding the world,” said Chris Tanner, president of Kansas Association of Wheat Growers. “Moving Food for Peace to USDA would continue to provide the needed relief for people in need. Thank you to Senator Moran and Congressman Mann for leading the way on this issue."
“Kansas-grown sorghum is a critical crop for food security in America and abroad,” said Adam York, CEO of Kansas Sorghum Producers Association. “Throughout changes in administrations, sorghum farmers have worked to have a seat at the table in international food programs housed across many agencies to ensure America’s farmers can contribute to our national security. We recommend policy makers continue prioritizing American agriculture as a solution to challenges in domestic and foreign policy.”
“National Sorghum Producers supports this legislation that would move U.S. food aid programs under the U.S. Department of Agriculture—a move that makes sense and would ensure the long-term viability and success of these programs by continuing to provide a critical market for American sorghum farmers and the ability to move grain from our fields to the hands of those in need around the world,” said Amy France, chairwoman of National Sorghum Producers.
“U.S. soybeans play an important role in addressing global hunger,” said Caleb Ragland, president of the American Soybean Association. “Soybeans are the only plant-based protein that provides all nine amino acids essential for human health, and our farmers have been proud to support international food assistance programs. ASA strongly supports efforts to protect these programs and to ensure U.S. grown commodities continue to feed vulnerable populations around the globe. We thank Representative Mann and Senator Moran for their leadership on this important issue.”
"Our nation's millers take great pride in feeding those facing famine emergencies around the world,” said Kim Z Cooper, Vice President of Government Affairs for the North American Millers’ Association. “Our flagship emergency food aid program Food for Peace not only helps those abroad, but is a critical component of Buy American and America First policies. We applaud Representatives Mann (R-KS), Thompson (R-PA), Crawford (R-AR), Newhouse (R-WA), Rouzer (R-NC), and Senators Moran and Hoeven for introducing legislation that would allow Food for Peace to operate under USDA, and reinstate this critical, life-saving program.”
This legislation is also supported by the U.S. Dry Bean Council, National Sorghum Producers, U.S. Wheat Associates, National Association of Wheat Growers, The Midwest Dry Bean Coalition, North Central Bean Dealers Association, Northarvest Bean Growers Association, National Corn Growers Association, American Soybean Association, USA Rice, U.S. Peanut Federation, American Farm Bureau Federation and the International Dairy Foods Association.
# # #