WHAT THEY ARE SAYING: President Trump Congratulates House Republicans on Passage of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act
WASHINGTON, D.C. – House Republicans passed H.R. 1, the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, which encompasses President Trump’s full legislative agenda to restore economic prosperity in the United States. The One Big Beautiful Bill Act provides tax relief for working families and small businesses; reverses the Biden-Harris administration’s whole-of-government assault on domestic energy; reins in reckless spending that lit the fuse on inflation; and gives the Trump Administration the critical resources they need to secure our border and strengthen our national security.
Following passage on the House Floor, the legislation was championed by President Trump, Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent, and congressional and business leaders from across the country.
Read what top voices have to say about the One Big Beautiful Bill Act:
“THE ONE, BIG, BEAUTIFUL BILL” has PASSED the House of Representatives! This is arguably the most significant piece of Legislation that will ever be signed in the History of our Country! The Bill includes MASSIVE Tax CUTS, No Tax on Tips, No Tax on Overtime, Tax Deductions when you purchase an American Made Vehicle, along with strong Border Security measures, Pay Raises for our ICE and Border Patrol Agents, Funding for the Golden Dome, “TRUMP Savings Accounts” for newborn babies, and much more! Great job by Speaker Mike Johnson, and the House Leadership, and thank you to every Republican who voted YES on this Historic Bill! Now, it’s time for our friends in the United States Senate to get to work, and send this Bill to my desk AS SOON AS POSSIBLE! There is no time to waste. The Democrats have lost control of themselves, and are aimlessly wandering around, showing no confidence, grit, or determination. They have forgotten their landslide loss in the Presidential Election, and are warped in the past, hoping someday to revive Open Borders for the World’s criminals to be able to pour into our Country, men to be able to play in women’s sports, and transgender for everybody. They don’t realize that these things, and so many more like them, will NEVER AGAIN happen!
“The media and the Democrats have consistently dismissed any possibility of House Republicans succeeding in our mission to enact President Trump’s America First agenda. Once again, they have been proven wrong. Today, the House has passed generational, nation-shaping legislation that reduces spending, permanently lowers taxes for families and job creators, secures the border, unleashes American energy dominance, restores peace through strength, and makes government work more efficiently and effectively for all Americans. House Democrats voted against all of it — which clearly proves they want tax hikes on their constituents, open borders, and Medicaid for illegal immigrants. We look forward to the Senate’s timely consideration of this once-in-a-generation legislation and stand ready to continue our work together to deliver The One Big Beautiful Bill to the President’s desk.”
“Last November, the American people gave us a mandate to end the years of bloated Biden government that led to the worst inflation in decades, a wide-open southern border, and a dangerous assault on American energy. With this One Big, Beautiful Bill, House Republicans are answering that mandate and implementing President Trump’s America First agenda, delivering on our promises and providing relief to American families who’ve been struggling for too long.
“President Trump's One Big, Beautiful Bill prevents the largest tax hike on American families and businesses in history, reestablishes American energy dominance through unleashing domestic production, secures the southern border and delivers much needed resources to carry out the President's immigration agenda, restores Peace through Strength, spurs economic growth and new investments, and secures historic spending reductions while protecting essential programs.
“A vote against this historic legislation is a vote for huge tax increases, inflation, open borders, energy dependence, fewer jobs, and less money in your pocket. If this legislation does not become law, the average taxpayer will see a 22 percent tax hike, the Child Tax Credit will be cut in half for 40 million families, guaranteed deduction will be slashed in half for 91 percent of taxpayers, and 26 million small businesses will experience a massive tax increase. With passage of this bill, the average American family will save $1,700 – the equivalent of nine weeks of groceries – increasing real annual take-home pay for a median-income household with two children by $4,000-$5,000.
“House Republicans started preparing for budget reconciliation with President Trump over a year ago, and I’m incredibly grateful to the President, our Committee Chairs, House leadership team, and all of our dedicated Republican members for the months of late nights and hard work that got us to this moment. This Big, Beautiful Bill is a huge win for all Americans, and I urge the Senate to pass it as quickly as possible so we can get it to President Trump’s desk and start delivering the relief Americans have been waiting for.”
“House Republicans have delivered historic America First policy wins for the American people. Not only does our One Big Beautiful Bill include the largest reduction in mandatory spending in history and bring out-of-control government programs to account, it also allows President Trump to continue his essential border security and deportation operations and creates a pro-growth tax code that prioritizes the working class. While Americans are still recovering from the failures of the Biden administration, President Trump and House Republicans are delivering on their promises to put the American people back on top.”
“House Republicans delivered. We kept our promises—lowering costs, unleashing American energy, avoiding the largest tax hike, securing the border, strengthening Medicaid, and investing in our national defense. Failure was not an option. I’m proud of our committee chairmen for their tireless work in getting this bill to the finish line and all our members for working together throughout this process. House Republicans are unified behind this bill for the American people.”
“I thank President Donald Trump for his leadership every step of the way. We share his vision and commitment for a better America. Now, it’s time for the Senate to quickly deliver this bill to the President’s desk.”
“House Republicans took the next critical step in fulfilling President Trump’s economic agenda by passing the One Big, Beautiful Bill, preventing historic tax hikes on hardworking Americans and saving millions of American jobs.”
“The House Republican passage of the One Big, Beautiful Bill marks a significant step toward advancing President Trump’s pro-growth agenda. This historic legislation aims to strengthen our fiscal foundation, support American families, and revitalize our domestic manufacturing. We look forward to continued progress in the Senate.”
“It is impossible to overstate how exceptional and extraordinary the One Big Beautiful Bill truly is. It delivers enthusiastically on every major campaign promise in the 2024 landslide electoral mandate.”
“House Republicans passed the One Big Beautiful Bill Act last night – the most significant piece of legislation in years.
“This could not have happened without the President’s leadership.
“President Trump is the greatest closer in the history of presidential politics.
“The One, Big, Beautiful Bill will implement President Trump’s Make America Great Again agenda by delivering the largest tax cut in American history, the largest border security investment in history, and the largest deficit reduction in nearly 30 years.
“The Senate should pass this critical legislation as soon as possible to usher in America's Golden Age.”
“Last November, the American people gave President Trump and the Republican-led Congress a mandate for change. House Republicans today took a critical step to bring the transformative One Big Beautiful Bill closer to final passage. This bill will deliver for the American people by extending tax relief for hardworking families and small businesses, securing our border, unleashing American energy dominance, achieving peace through strength, and critically – making real, measurable reductions in federal spending. This bill secures more savings than any other reconciliation bill in American history – protecting families from both a historic tax hike and the hidden costs of unchecked federal borrowing. Passing this legislation will be a first step in righting our fiscal trajectory and I remain committed to the hard work ahead of addressing our $36 trillion and growing national debt.”
“The House just secured BIG WINS for taxpayers in the One Big Beautiful Bill Act...Leadership isn’t about making the perfect the enemy of the good, but it’s about moving the ball forward without selling out your principles. My vote was about securing the wins we’ve fought for and continuing to move forward in the fight to rein in Washington’s cancerous spending.
“South Carolinians expect results, and this bill is a step toward restoring trust, accountability, and common sense in government. The American people sent us here to stop reckless spending, and today we delivered.”
“Passage of the Big Beautiful Bill in the House brings us one step closer to restoring the pro-growth policies that produced ‘Morning Again in America’ under Ronald Reagan and will produce the ‘New Golden Age’ under Donald Trump. That’s what the Democrats fear most.”
“The One Big, Beautiful Bill Act is set to prevent the largest tax hike in American history. I’m fighting to ensure WI-06 families, small businesses and manufacturers keep more of what they earn. These tax cuts work—House Republicans just voted to extend them and protect your paycheck.”
“This is a once-in-a-generation bill that will unlock President Trump’s full domestic agenda, which Georgians voted for overwhelmingly back in November. With the One, Big, Beautiful Bill Act we are unleashing our nation’s energy dominance, securing the border, putting more money back into hardworking Americans’ wallets, kicking illegal immigrants off Medicaid so that it is available for those who need it, and ending the waste, fraud, and abuse that risks sending our country into economic ruin. I could not be more proud of my House Republican colleagues for getting this fantastic bill passed, but the fight is not over.
“Georgia’s Senators now have a choice: Will they stand with the people of Georgia by preventing the largest tax hike in American history, or will they bend the knee to Chuck Schumer by siding with the liberal elites?”
“The One Big Beautiful Bill is a big win for America’s farmers and ranchers.
“It modernizes key agriculture programs, locks in tax relief, and preserves estate tax protections—giving family farms the certainty they need to weather tough times and pass their land to the next generation.”
“House Republicans got the job done. We kept our word - cutting costs for families, boosting American energy, stopping massive tax hikes, securing our southern border, strengthening Medicaid, and investing in our national defense. While no piece of legislation is perfect, this was a team effort with input from all of our constituents to deliver real results for the American people.”
“After much deliberation, I voted yes on H.R. 1, the One Big Beautiful Bill Act.
“Months ago, I worked to ensure that any tax cuts or extensions would be connected to an equal or greater amount of spending cuts to force fiscal discipline. The good news is that the bill technically held true to that framework by yielding modest deficit reduction over a 10-year budget window. Importantly, it does this by cutting spending $1.5 trillion over 10 years, reforming programs like Medicaid and SNAP with work requirements, and improving healthcare freedom by expanding health savings accounts to allow use with Direct Primary Care...We must reduce deficits much further, even as we continue to work to FULLY repeal the IRA’s unreliable energy subsidies and reduce the damage done by Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion. We can do this most efficiently with state block grants – but we can also reduce the 90% FMAP for able bodied people – ensuring states are not getting seven times more money for able bodied adults with no children over the most vulnerable in traditional Medicaid – and reducing provider taxes to end the unnecessary inflation of costs in healthcare.
“I stand ready to work with my colleagues in the Senate to continue to get this bill right before sending it to the President’s desk.”
“The One Big Beautiful Bill Act is the start of America’s return to fiscal sanity. This bill is the single best piece of legislation I have voted for when it comes to fixing our country’s fiscal future while serving in Washington, D.C. It will secure tax cuts on American vehicles, eliminate taxes on tips and overtime, and strengthen Medicaid for those who need it most. Amazingly, this bill also protects our country by funding the Golden Dome and securing our borders. President Trump demanded prosperity for the American people, and Congress delivered.”
“After months of hard work, hours at field hearings and roundtable discussions, long committee markups, and a series of all-nighters here in the Capitol, House Republicans have delivered on our one big, beautiful bill. This bill is in direct response to what Americans have communicated they want—competitive tax rates, a more secure border, bolstered domestic energy resources, more support for our military, and less government waste.
“I worked to get on the Ways and Means and Budget committees for this very moment to represent Utah in this historic effort to lower taxes for hardworking families and support our small business owners. We’ve seized this opportunity head-on, and now I urge the Senate to quickly move through the legislative process so we can get this bill to the president’s desk.”
“[The bill] ends benefits for illegal immigrants. Instead of giving Medicaid to able-bodied adults, it prioritizes the benefit for children, seniors and low-income Americans. It provides a tax credit for seniors, exceeding President Trump’s plan to end taxes on Social Security. It provides funding for more border security to keep our country safe. And perhaps more importantly, it extends the pro-family, pro-growth policies from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that even the New York Times and Washington Post admitted gave tax cuts to middle class Americans.”
“I want to thank President Trump and his team and Speaker Johnson for giving us the runway to strengthen conservative commitments in the One Big Beautiful Bill. And I am even more grateful for your trust as I continue to represent your values and, to the best of my ability, uphold the convictions we as Oklahomans hold dear.”
“The House just passed H.R. 1—a generational opportunity to deliver results for the American people. This legislation extends the 2017 tax cuts, unleashes American energy, reins in the regulatory state, and restores fiscal responsibility to government programs. It offers a compelling roadmap to a stronger, safer, and more prosperous future for our country.”
“As Americans face the largest tax increase in our nation’s history, House Republicans are stepping up to act. The One Big Beautiful Bill Act offers momentous tax relief that will help workers, families, seniors, farmers, and small businesses live the American Dream. Additionally, this bill ensures our border is secure, our energy industry is revitalized, and our economy is unshackled. I urge my colleagues in the Senate to pass this bill and get it to President Trump’s desk so he can sign it and deliver on his America first agenda.”
“The One, Big, Beautiful Bill that I debated on the House Floor and cast my vote for today will reduce taxes, secure our border, drive American energy independence, and boost take-home pay. This bill is about standing for working families, economic freedom, and common sense. I look forward to seeing the American Dream become attainable again for even more hard-working Americans with the passage of this historic bill.”
“The U.S. House of Representatives passed the One Big, Beautiful Bill this morning—delivering on President Trump’s America First agenda.
“This is a bill for hardworking American families. No tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and tax relief for seniors on Social Security. It enhances border security, ramps up deportations of criminal aliens, and unleashes American energy production.
“It also protects and strengthens Medicaid, Medicare, and Social Security for the people who truly need it most—pregnant women, children, individuals with disabilities, and seniors—by ending taxpayer-funded benefits for illegal immigrants and eliminating waste, fraud, and abuse.
“Democrats have been misleading the public for months—but we stayed focused and got the job done.
“Simply put—President Trump and House Republicans are keeping our promises by putting America First and, in doing so, will unlock a new golden age of prosperity for our country from sea to shining sea.”
“This is why I came to Congress—to fight for working families, defend our borders, and put America First.
“Today, the House delivered on that promise.
“The One Big Beautiful Bill Act locks in permanent tax cuts for families, ends the tax on tips, supercharges American energy, and gives our Border Patrol agents the tools they’ve been begging for to get the job done.
“I’m proud to have helped advance this historic legislation and deliver on the mandate the American people gave President Trump and House Republicans last November.
“Now, the Senate must act. Let’s finish the job and get this bill to the President’s desk.”
“THANK YOU, Mr. Speaker! Your leadership helped bring our House Republican team together to pass the One, Big, Beautiful Bill and benefit the lives of all Americans.”
"Today, House Republicans fulfilled a promise to deliver tax relief to the American people. This legislation will strengthen working families and small businesses in Pennsylvania and across the United States. Parents will benefit from an expanded Child Tax Credit. We have delivered President Trump's promise of no tax on tips, overtime, auto loan interest, and tax relief for seniors. And, we are putting more money in the pockets of millions of Americans. We are building on the success of the 2017 Tax Cuts & Jobs Act and we are making sure these pro-growth tax policies will benefit generations to come," said Rep. Kelly.
“I’m proud to support it.”
“I promised voters that if they sent me back to Congress, I would fight to keep their taxes low – and that’s exactly what this One Big Beautiful Bill does. The passage of the bill will prevent the looming tax increase that would be the largest in our nation’s history. Job growth, take-home pay, and economic opportunities hit historic highs following the passage of the 2017 tax cuts. This bill extends and expands those pro-worker and pro-family policies.”
“Last November, Americans delivered a very clear message when they elected President Donald Trump to a second term. They called for historic change. The ball was then in Congress’ court to codify the President’s agenda, which he quickly moved to implement on day one.
“Today, House Republicans are putting Americans’ hard-earned money back into their pockets, making safety net programs better serve those who really need them, strengthening border security, reviving energy dominance, and injecting life back into the economy—all in a fiscally responsible manner.”
“This morning, House Republicans passed the One Big, Beautiful Bill - stopping the largest tax hike in American history and advancing President Trump's America First agenda. Proud to support this groundbreaking legislation.”
MORE FROM THE HOUSE BUDGET COMMITTEE
Read Chairman Arrington’s statement following passage of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act HERE.
Read the One Big Beautiful Bill Act HERE.
Find House Majority Whip Tom Emmer’s (R-Minn.) announced lists of stakeholder support from nearly 1,000 organizations for key policies included in the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, introduced by Budget Chairman Jodey Arrington (R-Texas) HERE.