Legislative package works to break barriers faced by Michigan renters, ensure greater transparency in landlord practices

LANSING, Mich. (June 10, 2025) — To help address the state’s housing crisis, today, Senate Democrats introduced a comprehensive bill package that would strengthen protections and break barriers faced by Michigan renters. Led by Sen. Rosemary Bayer (D-West Bloomfield) and co-sponsored by Sens. Erika Geiss (D-Taylor), Jeff Irwin (D-Ann Arbor), and Mary Cavanagh (D-Redford Twp.), Senate Bills 372-375 would lower costs for Michigan renters, hold landlords accountable, and allow for the expungement of eviction records.

“As rising costs intensify our state’s existing housing crisis, it’s critical for us to take action to protect Michigan renters,” said Sen. Bayer. “That’s why I’m thrilled to introduce this legislative package alongside my Senate colleagues, aiming to lower costs and strengthen tenant rights. It’s time to hold landlords accountable for exploitative practices.”

Senate Bill 372 (Bayer) — Provides a $25 cap on rental application fees at or the amount it costs landlords to process the application, whichever is lower

Senate Bill 373 (Cavanagh) — Requires landlords to offer at least one fee-free method for their tenants to pay rent

Senate Bill 374 (Geiss) — Enables individuals to seal eviction records, with an option to expunge after three years

Senate Bill 375 (Irwin) — Limits landlords’ ability to charge tenants for excess “junk” fees beyond rent, such as fees for landscaping or snow removal

Along with capping the fees landlords charge for their rental applications, Senate Bill 372 would ensure that the property individuals are applying for is available before charging them a fee, addressing a longstanding issue faced by too many Michiganders who’ve sent both money and time down the drain by applying for properties that aren’t actually available. The bill would also allow for the reuse of independent background checks for 45 days — versus forcing individuals to pay for a new one with each application — as well as require that landlords disclose when an applicant was denied due to information disclosed in the background check.

“Every Michigander deserves access to a safe, affordable place to call home — but as rent continues to climb and undisclosed fees are added to expenses, this basic need has been out of reach for so many families across our state,” said Sen. Cavanagh. “My bill works to crack down on the high cost of housing by requiring landlords to offer at least one method for tenants to pay rent that does not incur additional fees. These unnecessary fees quickly add up and contribute to the exorbitant cost of living that has long kept Michiganders priced out of housing. This legislation increases tenant protections and lowers housing costs so Michiganders can keep more of their money in their pocket.”

Eviction records pose another barrier for prospective renters in the state. There are nearly 200,000 evictions filed every year in Michigan, oftentimes tarnishing a tenant’s rental history and making it nearly impossible for them to secure a stable home for themselves and their family. The case is the same for tenants who end up battling disputes in housing court — even if those disputes don’t end up in eviction. By allowing for the immediate sealing of eviction records and their expungement after three years, Senate Bill 374 offers an opportunity for these tenants to gain stable housing. It also seeks to hold landlords accountable for unfair, retaliatory eviction practices.

“For far too long, permanent eviction records have unfairly defined people even after their situations have changed,” said Sen. Geiss. “I am proud to join my colleagues on this bill package to address our state’s housing crisis by strengthening protections, promoting upward mobility, and reducing long-term systemic barriers that only reinforce poverty. My bill, which allows expungement of eviction records after three years, will give people a second chance at securing safe, stable housing, leading to better health, education, and employment outcomes.”

“Junk fees are unpredictable and harmful to Michigan renters, jeopardizing their housing stability while leaving landlords to profit at their expense,” said Sen. Irwin. “My bill would protect Michigan renters and ensure a more fair and transparent renting process.”

additional work by Senate Democrats This bill package builds onto secure protections for Michigan renters. It has been referred to the Senate Committee on Housing and Human Services for consideration.

###