HEARING NOTICE: “Reversing the Curse: Rooting Out Waste and Fraud and Restoring the Dignity of Work”
WASHINGTON, D.C. - On Wednesday, June 25, 2025, at 10:00 AM in 210 Cannon House Office Building, the House Committee on the Budget will hold a hearing entitled, “Reversing the Curse: Rooting Out Waste and Fraud and Restoring the Dignity of Work.”
HBC hearings and markups are available LIVE from our website or YouTube.
Seating in the hearing room is limited. Members of the public may view the hearing via live webcast available here. The webcast will not be available until the hearing starts.
DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:
Please note: oral testimony at this hearing will be from the invited witnesses only. Individuals or organizations not scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. Any person(s) or organization(s) can submit written comments for the hearing record here: Ryan.Bailey@mail.house.gov.
Please ATTACH your submission as a Microsoft Word document in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below by the close of business on Friday, June 27th. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems, please call 202-226-7270.
FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:
The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will not alter the content of your submission but reserves the right to format it according to guidelines.
Any submission provided to the Committee by a witness, any materials submitted for the printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any submission not in compliance with these guidelines will not be printed but will be maintained in the Committee files for review and use by the Committee.
All submissions and supplementary materials must be submitted in a single document via email, provided in Word format and must not exceed a total of 10 pages. Please indicate the title of the hearing as the subject line in your submission. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing record.
All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. The name, company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness must be included in the body of the email. Please exclude any personally identifiable information in the attached submission.
Failure to follow the formatting requirements may result in the exclusion of a submission. All submissions for the record are final.
ACCOMMODATIONS:
The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons with disabilities. If you require accommodations, please call 202-226-7270 in advance of the event—48 hours notice is requested. Questions regarding accommodation needs in general, including availability of Committee materials in alternative formats, may be directed to the Committee as noted above.
Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on the Committee website at https://budget.house.gov/news.