Investigation Launched Into Historical Sexual Misconduct At Interlochen
By Luke Haase | June 14, 2025
Interlochen President Trey Devey says the institution’s leadership has learned of sexual misconduct on campus involving former faculty members and students during the 1960s and 1970s. Interlochen has engaged a Massachusetts-based civil rights law firm to conduct an independent investigation. Interlochen alumni and current faculty and staff have been notified of the investigation, and anyone with information relating to those incidents is being encouraged to come forward. Devey emphasizes to The Ticker that no current faculty, staff, or students were involved in the historical incidents.
Devey says someone first reached out in April 2024 about an incident from decades ago, and that Interlochen officials immediately responded and decided to open the process to others potentially affected.
Shortly thereafter, Devey and the Board of Directors decided to initiate an external investigation and to hire a law firm “with subject matter expertise and the ability to conduct a trauma-informed and sensitive investigation,” he says, noting that the investigation is being conducted completely independent of Interlochen. The goal, Devey adds, is to gather facts and "to understand our past, however imperfect, and to be proactive, learn from the experience, and as always strengthen our safety practices.”
He says there is no deadline for the investigation. “We have asked that people with information to come forward by September, but with matters like this that are so very sensitive, we realize that’s what we would like, but when someone is willing and able to share, it might not be on our timetable.”
Devey declined to identify the staff members involved or any details about the incidents. “It’s important that I be sensitive to the integrity of the investigation and to those affected,” he says.
It’s unclear if the faculty member or members involved are still alive and if so, what potential prosecution could eventually come. Grand Traverse County Prosecuting Attorney Noelle Moeggenberg tells The Ticker, "We would get involved if there was something we could (prosecute). The catch is it has to be first degree. There's no statute of limitations for first degree (criminal sexual conduct). If there's a victim that comes forward in their investigation, we would just want to make sure they're aware of their options criminally as well." Moeggenberg says she will likely contact Interlochen to inform them of those options so victims can be directed to the Sheriff's Office as necessary.
In 2021, a “Jane Doe” testified at the Ghislaine Maxwell trial that she met convicted sex trafficker Jeffrey Epstein and Maxwell at Interlochen Arts Camp in the early 1990s and alleged that her mother and she later visited Epstein and Maxwell. No abuse was ever alleged to have taken place at Interlochen.
Devey says he has complete confidence in the current safety measures on campus. “We have existing and highly formalized processes for any current student, staff or faculty member with allegations involving any stakeholder” and that those policies are "constantly vetted and improved to ensure we are following best practices.”
Those measures include a dedicated Title IX committee of the Board of Directors. The organization has also partnered with Grand River Solutions and Association of Title IX Administrators (ATIXA) to evaluate all policies, procedures, and programs to protect students against sexual misconduct. All Interlochen employees are trained on protecting students and staff from discrimination of any kind, including discrimination based on sex and sexual harassment.
“The safety of our students is the number one priority we have. Anything to do with the safety of students goes immediately to board leadership,” Devey adds.
The historical incidents reported to date all involved Interlochen Arts Academy, and not its summer camp.