Government Relations and Policy in Kentucky
Partnering with state and local governments for a more sustainable future for people and nature in Kentucky.
The Nature Conservancy is nonpartisan, nonconfrontational and collaborative. We work with policymakers on both sides of the aisle and all stakeholders to move policy forward that benefits people and nature. Our science-based approach focuses on what brings us together, not on what divides us.
Here in Kentucky, we are working with policymakers to help enact legislation that protects nature and invests in local communities. We know that policy makes conservation possible. By sharing our years of on-the-ground expertise, we can help inform policy that moves conservation forward.
In Kentucky, TNC’s involvement in conservation issues and our nonpartisan, science-based, solutions-oriented approach is well-respected across the political spectrum. Our successful government relations program ensures TNC’s status as a trusted voice on conservation and related issues in Kentucky—a voice that elected officials, the public and other organizations turn to.
Recently, TNC in Kentucky's State Director, David Phemister, and Director of External Affairs, Heather Jeffs, spoke with Kentucky legislators to discuss the importance of land conservation for people and nature. Our work on protecting Cumberland Forest Wildlife Management Area, the largest conservation easement in state history, is an example of our bipartisan efforts to work toward the protection of nearly 55,000 acres of the critical Appalachian Mountains.
TNC’s policy and government relations work is critical for our conservation success. Our work builds support among key constituencies including the general public, elected officials, businesses and industries and other potential partners and supporters. Building a baseline of support among these constituencies can unlock both potential public and private funding opportunities, build strong partnerships and networks, lead to positive policies and regulations and create a sense of urgency for our work.
Species that were at the brink of extinction like bald eagles, peregrine falcons, white-tailed deer, turkey, elk, striped bass and more, are all examples of fish and wildlife that now have healthy and thriving populations thanks to dedicated funding for increased conservation efforts.
That is why we work with partners and politicians to help enact policy that protect people and nature. Our work across state and party lines has helped legislators reintroduce RAWA (Restoring America's Wildlife Act). This legislation would be the most significant investment in wildlife conservation in decades, providing $1.397 billion to fund local and state efforts to help recover endangered species and to prevent at-risk wildlife from becoming endangered.
Quote: Heather Jeffs
Together, we have accomplished a lot for people and nature. We will continue to work in Kentucky to enact policies that protect our land, water, climate and communities. Healthy farming practices help support healthy rivers, smart fire management helps prevent wildfires and thriving ecosystems create natural places for people to enjoy nature. We will continue to work for a brighter future for all.
Make a Difference in Kentucky
From the beautiful Appalachian Mountains in the east to the fertile Mississippi River Basin in the west, nature matters to Kentuckians. By supporting our work, you can help ensure a future in which nature and people can thrive.