-
Igor Bobic / HuffPost: GOP Senators Had No Idea They Voted For Controversial Gambling Tax — How the sausage is made in Washington: In the dark and behind closed doors. -
Jordain Carney / Politico: Russia sanctions bill could get Senate vote this month, Thune says — Senate Majority Leader John Thune signaled Wednesday the Senate is prepared to pass … -
Politico: Trump is interested in new Russia sanctions. But there's a catch. … The administration's desired changes would solidify the president's waiver authority … -
Andrew Solender / Axios: Democrats propose inspector general specifically for Trump — A group of House and Senate Democrats introduced legislation to create an inspector general … -
Sara Fischer / Axios: X CEO Linda Yaccarino to step down — X CEO Linda Yaccarino said Wednesday she is stepping down from her role. … - Under her leadership … -
Jason Abbruzzese / NBC News: Linda Yaccarino to step down as CEO of X — Yaccarino announced her departure on the social media platform but did not provide a reason. -
Zachary B. Wolf / CNN: Meet the new national police force — A version of this story appeared in CNN's What Matters newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up for free here. — CNN — -
Politico: Biden's physician declines to cooperate in GOP probe of former president's mental fitness — Kevin O'Connor, who served as Joe Biden's physician while the former president … -
New York Times: Measles Cases Hit Record High, 25 Years After U.S. Eliminated the Disease — Experts worry that if vaccination rates do not improve, deadly outbreaks will become the new normal. -
Sam Skove / Politico: Over 2,000 senior staff set to leave NASA under agency push … Many of those leaving also serve in NASA's core mission sets, according to the documents. -
Wassim Serhan / Slingshot Strategies: Slingshot Poll: The NYC Mayor's Race, July 2-July 6 — Slingshot conducted a poll of registered voters in NYC from July 2nd to July 6th. -
Jeff Coltin / Politico: Zohran Mamdani leads general election poll for NYC mayor … The multimodal survey of 1,036 registered New York City voters was conducted between July 2-6 … -
John Sipher / The Bulwark: The CIA Director Didn't Read His Own Report — THE FBI HAS LAUNCHED A CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION into James Comey and John Brennan, respectively directors of the FBI and CIA … -
NBC News: Trump administration targets Comey, Brennan with new investigation — The Justice Department confirmed an investigation into two frequent Trump targets. -
Wall Street Journal: The Supreme Court Says the President Can Fire People — The Justices nix a lower-court universal injunction that presumed illegality. — Do you hear the Justices now? -
USA Today: With new power, Trump will move immediately to lay off federal workers — President Donald Trump has seized the authority to lay off federal workers and reorganize … -
Joseph Cox / 404 Media: ICE Is Searching a Massive Insurance and Medical Bill Database to Find Deportation Targets — Agents from Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) … -
Cat Zakrzewski / Washington Post: Trump combats TACO reputation as White House extends tariff deadline — As Wall Street traders continued to share the unflattering accusation that … -
Wall Street Journal: Trump Delayed Reciprocal Tariffs After Bessent Wanted More Time on Deals — President also decided to send out letters as a way to keep the pressure up -
Fox News: Trump admin suing California over alleged Title IX violations — California was found to be in violation of Title IX late last month, the Education Department says -
US Department of Justice: Justice Department Sues California for Violating Title IX, Denying Girls Athletic Opportunities — For Immediate Release — The Justice Department's Civil … -
Ron Filipkowski / Meidas+: Trump Made His Epstein Problem Much Worse — Years have gone by since Jeffrey Epstein was tried, convicted, sent to prison, and committed suicide (allegedly). -
Associated Press: Trump appointees have ties to companies that stand to benefit from privatizing weather forecasts — As commerce secretary, Howard Lutnick oversees … -
Barak Ravid / Axios: Scoop: Secret White House meeting on Gaza raises hopes for ceasefire deal — Senior U.S., Israeli and Qatari officials held secret talks at the White House … -
William Kristol / The Bulwark: The Enemy of My Enemy Is My Elon — No friendship with Donald Trump can last for very long. We've seen plenty of examples: Michael Cohen, “Sloppy” Steve Bannon … -
Zack Beauchamp / Vox: Liberalism is worth saving. Just ask its critics. — Prior to Kanye West, Lawrence Dennis was America's most famous Black fascist. -
Daniel Trotta / Reuters: Musk chatbot Grok removes posts after complaints of antisemitism — Grok, the chatbot developed by the Elon Musk-founded company xAI, removed what it called … -
New York Times: Trump Administration Renews Attacks On Harvard With Negotiations Uncertain — The Department of Homeland Security issued administrative subpoenas seeking data … -
Edward-Isaac Dovere / CNN: Some of Mamdani's far-left allies want to primary Hakeem Jeffries and other NYC Democrats — Democratic socialists in New York City emboldened … -
John Ganz / Unpopular Front: J.D. Vance's Anti-Declaration — Truths Self-Evident No More — There's a lot going on in the world, arguably much of it of more material consequence … -
Russell Contreras / Axios: ICE accused of racial profiling in detentions of Latino U.S. citizens — A growing number of U.S. citizens — many of them Latinos — are reporting they were detained … -
Adam Cancryn / CNN: Trump said he threatened to bomb Moscow if Putin attacked Ukraine, 2024 fundraiser tapes show — Donald Trump told a private gathering of donors last year … -
Jenni Reid / CNBC: Copper now costs way more in the U.S. than elsewhere. This could hit its economy hard … The cost of copper for U.S. buyers has rocketed after President Donald Trump … -
Arya Sundaram / Gothamist: 'They're killing us': Immigrants complain of inhumane conditions inside NYC holding site … We rely on your support to make local news available to all -
Politico: Jan. 6 rally organizer must pay $2K a day until she complies with subpoena, judge rules … “I don't want to resort to incarceration if at all possible,” the judge said. -
Edgar Sandoval / New York Times: Death Toll Reaches at Least 119 in Texas Floods, With 173 Missing — Officials said they would search for remains until all the victims have been accounted for. -
New York Times: With Taxes and Tariffs in Place, Trump Takes Reins of U.S. Economy … President Trump has forged ahead with the grand and potentially disruptive economic experiment …