President Donald Trump took to social media Monday night to promote a limited edition, self-branded fragrance in a bottle topped with a gold statuette of a generic man in a suit, called “Victory 45-47.”
“For Patriots who never back down, like President Trump. This scent is your rallying cry in a bottle,” reads the advertising copy for both a men’s cologne and a women’s perfume sold under the same name.
Trump launched the scents with an announcement on Truth Social, wedged between posts boasting about U.S. tariff revenue and touting the so-called “One Big Beautiful Bill.” Hours later, Trump posted: “We brought respect and dignity back.”
“Trump Fragrances are here. They’re called ‘Victory 45-47’ because they’re all about Winning, Strength, and Success,” wrote the president. “Get yourself a bottle, and don’t forget to get one for your loved ones too. Enjoy, have fun, and keep winning!”
Victory 45-47 costs a whopping $249 for 3.3 fluid ounces. Roughly the same quantity of Chanel No. 5 retails for $176.
Last month, White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt said it was “absurd for anyone to insinuate that this president is profiting off of the presidency.”
Trump’s net worth was estimated at $5.1 billion in March, a full $1.2 billion more than the year before, according to Forbes. It is the highest Trump’s net worth has ever been in the magazine’s rankings. “It’s quite a comeback for the former president, who more than doubled his net worth in a year,” wrote Forbes senior editor Dan Alexander in March. “It pays to be king.” (Just recently, Trump attacked Forbes and Alexander in a Truth Social post.)
The first convicted felon to serve as president, Trump has sidelined past notions of propriety, busted all previous ethical boundaries, and annihilated remaining norms surrounding graft. After being twice impeached during his first term, the president has dismantled any viable machinery of accountability during his second stint in the White House. Trump has fired government inspectors general, installed loyalists at the Justice Department and FBI, and is protected from legislative oversight and additional impeachments by a Republican-controlled Congress.
The Intercept has documented Trump and his family’s efforts to monetize the presidency via meme coins and cryptocurrency. They and their business partners have collected at least $320 million in fees from $TRUMP crypto.
To mark the 100th day of Trump’s second term, Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., read 100 reports of graft into the congressional record on April 29. “Trump and his administration have paved the way for the president, his top officials, and his billionaire buddies to personally feed at the trough of government corruption,” she said.
Trump reported income of more than $630 million last year, including $57 million from cryptocurrency sales.
Trump has assets in excess of $1.6 billion across a business empire that includes real estate holdings, hotels, golf courses, as well as investment accounts and numerous Trump-branded efforts, according to a 234-page financial disclosure released by the White House earlier this month.
But every little bit counts: Trump also made $2.5 million from Trump sneakers and perfumes in 2024.
Trump previously hawked a “Fight, Fight, Fight” line of fragrances that harken back to the 2024 attempt on his life in Butler, Pennsylvania. Those scents sell for $199 a bottle.
The new Trump perfume and cologne are also available through GetTrumpSneakers.com. A webpage touting Victory 45-47 perfume refers to it as “rare, exclusive, collectible footwear.”
“45Footwear uses Donald J. Trump’s name, likeness and image under paid license from CIC Ventures LLC,” according to the website’s fine print, which also notes “these are only official Golf Shoes, Sneakers & Fragrances by President Trump!” 45Footwear, LLC is “not owned, managed or controlled” by the president, the Trump Organization, or CIC but says that it pays CIC for a branding deal. Trump himself is the manager, president, secretary, and treasurer of CIC Ventures, according to his recent financial disclosure, which valued the firm at somewhere between $1 million and $5 million. Wyoming, where 45Footwear is incorporated, does not require businesses to publicly disclose their owners’ names.
“Trump Fragrances are not designed, manufactured, distributed or sold by Donald J. Trump, The Trump Organization or any of their respective affiliates or principals,” the Trump Fragrance website says, despite this close connection.
The scents and sneakers are part of numerous merchandise, retail sales, and licensing deals worth more than $8 million, which also include products from guitars to watches.
Not all Trump-branded products can deliver a rallying cry in a bottle, or even Trump’s full name. Tim Petit, a Rhode Island man, bought a $640 “Inauguration First Lady” pink-dialed timepiece for his wife, who cried when her husband gave her a watch that instead said “RUMP.” “I’m very disappointed,” he told his local NBC affiliate. “I want it to be a special thing for her. And we had expected that it would have the integrity of the president of the United States and good follow-through.”
Trump has recently addressed the problem of corruption head-on by encouraging other nations to turn a blind eye to possible wrongdoing by their elected leaders.
Last weekend, Trump demanded Israeli prosecutors drop the graft charges against Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who is on trial for allegedly accepting hundreds of thousands of dollars of luxury goods in exchange for political favors and attempting to negotiate for more favorable coverage from Israeli media outlets. “Bibi Netanyahu’s trial should be CANCELLED, IMMEDIATELY, or a Pardon given to a Great Hero, who has done so much for the State,” Trump posted on Truth Social. “It was the United States of America that saved Israel, and now it is going to be the United States of America that saves Bibi Netanyahu. THIS TRAVESTY OF ‘JUSTICE’ CAN NOT BE ALLOWED!”
IT’S EVEN WORSE THAN WE THOUGHT.
This is not hyperbole.
We’re independent of corporate interests. Will you help us?
Latest Stories
The War on Immigrants
Trump’s Big Beautiful Gift to Anduril
The One Big Beautiful Bill Act requires all new border surveillance towers to be certified "autonomous." Only Anduril's fit the bill.
Chilling Dissent
Pro-Israel Professor Shai Davidai Is Leaving Columbia
Davidai posted on social media that he had been cleared of allegations filed against him last year. He was previously suspended after he was accused of harassment and intimidation.
The War on Immigrants