Press Releases
Bacon, Hurd, Gottheimer, Meeks, Introduce Bill to Restore Congress’ Constitutional Role in TradeBacon, Hurd, Gottheimer, Meeks, Introduce Bill to Restore Congress’ Constitutional Role in TradeCompanion Legislation to Grassley and Cantwell’s BillWASHINGTON – Rep. Don Bacon (R-NE-02), along with Reps. Jeff Hurd (R-CO-03), Josh Gottheimer (D-NJ-05), and Gregory Meeks (D-NY-05) introduced bipartisan legislation to return Congress’ constitutionally authorized role in setting and approving U.S. trade policy. H.R. 2665 The Trade Review Act of 2025 requires that unilateral tariffs proposed by the executive branch receive congressional authority. Bacon has publicly stated his support for some tariffs imposed by the Trump Administration while also maintaining that the Constitution gives Congress the task of imposing tariffs under Article I Section 8. This legislation is the companion bill to Senators Chuck Grassley (R-IA) and Maria Cantwell’s (D-WA) legislation, The Trade Review Act of 2025, which mirrors Grassley’s 2019 Section 232 tariff reform efforts as Senate Finance Committee Chairman during the first Trump administration. “The Constitution clearly gives the authority for taxes and tariffs to Congress, but for too long, we have handed that authority to the executive branch,” said Rep. Bacon. “This is less about the actual tariffs laid by the Trump Administration, some of which I support because they are reciprocal, but more a commitment to uphold the Constitution. Congress has the power of the purse. Our Founders created checks and balances for a reason.” “As a constitutional conservative, I am proud to co-lead the ‘Trade Review Act of 2025’, reasserting our congressional responsibility in imposing tariffs,” said Rep. Hurd. “Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution is clear: ‘The Congress shall have Power to lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises.’ This isn’t a political issue for me. I believe Congress must reclaim its constitutionally mandated authority, and I would support this measure regardless of who is in the White House.” “When people are already struggling with higher costs, we must do everything possible to make their lives more affordable. President Trump’s tariffs are doing just the opposite — raising the cost of nearly everything from coffee to cars and clothing while slashing people’s retirement savings and sending markets plummeting," said Rep. Gottheimer. "That’s why I’m introducing the bipartisan Trade Review Act with Rep. Bacon to restore Congress’ constitutional authority to oversee foreign trade.” “For too long, presidents have wielded tariffs as political weapons rather than strategic tools,” said Rep. Meeks. “The Trade Review Act restores constitutional checks and balances by ensuring Congress has a voice before American families are hit with higher costs. If a president wants to raise taxes on the American people through tariffs, they should be required to explain why—and get Congressional approval to do it.” What is included? The bill establishes a process for Congressional review of new or increased tariffs (duties) imposed by the President. Specifically, it would:
Overall, the bill increases Congressional oversight over the executive branch’s ability to unilaterally impose tariffs. The full text of the bill is available here. ### |