Senate Democrats continue the fight to ensure Michigan’s seniors and vulnerable adults are safeguarded from abuse and exploitation

Veronica Klinefelt, (D-Eastpointe) introduced legislation to strengthen protections for those who may need additional assistance because of advanced age or a mental or physical impairment. Composed of Senate Bills 111 114 LANSING, Mich. (February 27, 2025) — Determined to ensure all Michiganders, including vulnerable adults, have access to the safety and justice they deserve, a group of Democratic Senators, led by Sen.(D-Eastpointe) introduced legislation to strengthen protections for those who may need additional assistance because of advanced age or a mental or physical impairment. Composed of Senate Bills, this comprehensive legislative package would enhance protections for vulnerable adults by making a special personal protection order available, strengthening penalties for abuse and financial exploitation offenses, and developing programs to increase prevention efforts.

“The abuse and exploitation of our older and vulnerable adults is something we cannot ignore,” said Sen. Klinefelt. “Despite this legislation not getting fully across the finish line last session, I am more determined than ever to work across the aisle to ensure our vulnerable adults are afforded the protections they need to live with security and peace of mind.”

“It’s never easy when an aging parent or grandparent dies, and finding out that an individual has been taking advantage of them after their death certainly does not bring any comfort,” said Sen. Kevin Hertel (D-St. Clair Shores). “My bill in this package would close critical loopholes to strengthen the tools our criminal justice system has available to prosecute this type of heinous fraud and ensure grieving families and their lost loved ones are not exploited for gross financial gain.”

To address this growing problem, this package will help local, and state governments better prevent, detect, and prosecute all forms of elder abuse. More specifically, this legislation would:

Allow an individual who is 60 years or older, is a vulnerable adult, or has a developmental disability to petition the court to obtain an elder and vulnerable adult personal protection order (Senate Bill 111, Klinefelt ).

Increase the amount of time prosecutors have — from six years to 10 — to recover property in embezzlement cases where criminals have taken advantage of vulnerable adults (Senate Bill 112, Anthony ).

Protect vulnerable adults even after death, treating offenses the same as if the exploitation had occurred during the victim’s lifetime (Senate Bill 113, Hertel ).

Take an all-in approach to preventing, intervening, investigating, and prosecuting abuse, neglect, and financial exploitation of older and vulnerable adults by bringing together local teams of experts (Senate Bill 114, Irwin).

“Our laws should protect everyone, including those who appear least able to defend themselves. Unfortunately, our current laws leave seniors — our parents and grandparents — vulnerable to financial exploitation, scams, and fraud,” said Sen. Sarah Anthony (D-Lansing). “This legislation aims to address that issue. I will continue to fight and advocate for our seniors until we have a fair legal system equipped to defend every Michigander, especially some of the most vulnerable among us.”

reintroduction of legislation This is athat was first introduced in the 102nd Legislature. During the last session, the package passed the Senate and garnered support from a broad coalition of stakeholders including the Michigan Elder Justice Initiative, Michigan Poverty Law Program, Crime Victims Legal Assistance Project, Michigan Catholic Conference, Michigan Sheriffs Association, Disability Rights Michigan, Michigan State Employee Retirees Association, and more.

“Vulnerable adults often need care and services from a wide range of professionals, and it’s easy for their needs to fall through the cracks when they are passed from one office to another,” said Sen. Jeff Irwin (D-Ann Arbor). “That’s why I’m sponsoring this legislation, to enable local governments to set up interdisciplinary care teams that will work together to provide efficient and comprehensive services best suited to each individual.”

Senate Bills 111-114 now head to the Senate Civil Rights, Judiciary, and Public Safety Committee for their consideration.

###