Elon Musk’s favorability dropped again this past week amid his renewed feud with President Trump and move to launch a separate political party.
In the last week, Musk’s net favorability in the aggregate kept by Decision Desk HQ (DDHQ) dropped 3.4 points, falling just more than 20 points in the negative. The percentage that view the onetime Trump ally unfavorably reached its highest point of the president’s second term at 55.8 percent, while the percentage that view him favorably reached its lowest point yet, at 35.4 percent, as of Monday.
The decline comes as Trump’s approval and favorability ratings have ticked down a bit over the same period of time, though to a lesser extent than Musk’s, whose popularity has suffered greatly since he first joined the administration and oversaw the Department of Government Efficiency’s widespread cuts across the federal workforce.
BestReviews is reader-supported and may earn an affiliate commission.
Amazon Prime Day Deals
The feud between the president and Musk first began last month as the tech billionaire railed against Trump’s “big, beautiful bill” after leaving the administration at the end of his 130-day tenure as a special government employee. A war of words followed between the two men, who traded personal attacks.
The tensions showed some signs of cooling as both expressed some openness to moving on, but the dispute picked up again in recent days as Musk officially formed his own political party called the America Party to rival both the Republicans and Democrats.
“When it comes to bankrupting our country with waste & graft, we live in a one-party system, not a democracy,” Musk said in a post on his social platform X. “Today, the America Party is formed to give you back your freedom.”
Musk reposted another user’s comments that said a possible platform for the party could include reducing the federal debt, modernizing the military with artificial intelligence, advancing “pro tech” policies, decreasing energy regulations, promoting “free speech and “pro natalist” goals and instituting “centrist policies everywhere else.”
Trump slammed Musk’s move, saying in a Sunday post on Truth Social that he’s “saddened to watch Elon Musk go completely ‘off the rails,’ essentially becoming a TRAIN WRECK over the past five weeks.”
Despite Musk’s significant wealth, he would likely have to overcome hurdles for his America Party to break into the two-party system, as many third parties have formed over the years but failed to obtain the same reach as the Democrats and GOP.
His declining popularity has also been seen among Republicans who had previously viewed him more favorably since the start of his conflict with Trump. Multiple polls have found a lower percentage of Republicans viewing Musk favorably over the past month.