The White House on Tuesday officially sent its request to the Congress to claw back $9.4 billion in approved spending, which would take away funding from programs targeted by Elon Musk’s Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE).
The $9.4 billion package, known as “recissions” on Capitol Hill, requires President Trump to take approval from the Congress in order to return the money which had been previously appropriated. And the move to cancel the funding via Congress route would also insulate the Trump administration from legal blockades.
Trump aides have said the spending cuts are targeting programs which have liberal ideologies. If the said request passes from the House and Senate, it would formalise several spending cuts and freezes suggested by DOGE.
NEW: Today, we sent the first rescissions package to Capitol Hill.
This package contains BILLIONS in wasteful foreign aid and federal funding for NPR and PBS.
Here’s just some of the waste, fraud, and abuse identified: 🧵
— Office of Management and Budget (@WHOMB) June 3, 2025
The development comes when Elon Musk has officially exited DOGE and White House but heavily criticized Trump’s tax cut and spending plan, calling it on Tuesday a “disgusting abomination” for increasing the federal deficit.
$1.1 billion for the left-wing Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which uses your taxpayer dollars to fund PBS and NPR. pic.twitter.com/kp8lTNT5S3
— Office of Management and Budget (@WHOMB) June 3, 2025
The White House spending cuts would target the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (funding cuts for NPR, PBS), United States Agency for International Development (USAID) as well among others. Congress needs to clear the White House request in 45 days and it can through simple majority, meaning no Democratic support would be needed in both House and Senate.
In a statement House Speaker Mike Johnson said, “This rescissions package reflects many of DOGE’s findings and is one of the many legislative tools Republicans are using to restore fiscal sanity. Congress will continue working closely with the White House to codify these recommendations,” CNN reported.
Meanwhile, White House budget director Russ Vought said that more recissions package and spending cuts would follow the suit, if the current effort succeeds in the House.
White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt called Vought “a “well-respected fiscal hawk,” and said that White House budget director has tools to produce more savings.