MSU Extension Center for Local Government Finance and Policy names Erika Rosebrook director
Rosebrook joins the Center from MSU’s Department of Political Science, following a nationwide search.
Following a nationwide search, Michigan State University Extension has named Erika Rosebrook as the new director of the Center for Local Government Finance and Policy. In this role, Rosebrook will oversee programming related to local government finance and policy.
The Center’s focus on this topic serves to enhance decision-making for public officials through a diverse offering of training, engagement, and applied research opportunities. Data-driven, innovative tools are key to their work, providing fundamental insights for communities like Lansing, Detroit, and many additional municipalities as they confront financial challenges and respond to the needs of their residents.
Dave Ivan, director of community, food and environment-related programming for MSU Extension said Rosebrook was a natural fit to lead this next chapter for the Center.
“After an extensive search process, our MSU Extension team couldn’t be happier to welcome Dr. Rosebrook to her new role with the Center,” Ivan shared. “The Center’s work is driven by our Extension mission and deep commitment to serving communities of all sizes across Michigan, and I look forward to seeing Dr. Rosebrook build on that foundation.”
Rosebrook joins the Center from MSU’s Department of Political Science, where she served as an assistant professor with research focusing on the relationship between state and local governments. Since 2021, Rosebrook has also led the Department’s Master of Public Policy program as interim director.
“I am thrilled to step into this role with the Center for Local Government Finance and Policy,” said Rosebrook. “Local government plays a critical role in fostering thriving communities, and their leaders need the right knowledge, tools, and support to tackle complex challenges, seize opportunities, and build a stronger future for their residents.”
“The Center provides this invaluable support to local governments across Michigan, and I am excited to further this work providing sustainable, community-centered solutions,” Rosebrook continued.
Prior to this work, Rosebrook was associate director of the Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives and served in a variety of administrative roles in Michigan local governments and nonprofits. She received a bachelor’s degree in sociology from the University of Chicago, followed by a master’s degree in public administration from the Harvard Kennedy School and a doctorate in political science from MSU.
MSU Extension’s Center for Local Government Finance and Policy
Located within the MSU Department of Agricultural, Food, and Resource Economics and in partnership with MSU Extension, the Center for Local Government Finance and Policy was founded in 2015 to help Michigan “thrive local” by supporting communities in their efforts to efficiently deliver critical public services that safeguard their health, safety, and well-being.