What to know today
- The Supreme Court allowed reductions in force and reorganizations at almost two dozen departments and agencies across the federal government to move forward while the appeals process in the case is underway.
- President Donald Trump spoke to reporters about the difficulties in reaching a Russia-Ukraine ceasefire, the recent strikes on Iran's nuclear enrichment facilities and the deadline for other countries to avoid paying U.S. tariffs in wide-ranging remarks at a Cabinet meeting today.
- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was at the White House today to talk with Trump about efforts to reach a ceasefire in Gaza after they discussed that issue and the strikes on Iran yesterday. Netanyahu visited Capitol Hill earlier today.
Coverage of this live blog has ended. For the latest news, click here.
Republican senator suggests Putin should be tried as a war criminal and hanged
Sen. Roger Marshall, R-Kan., indicated to reporters tonight that Putin should be put on trial by the International Criminal Court and put to death.
“As far as I’m concerned,” Putin “can be tried at The Hague and hung by the neck," Marshall said as he talked about the prospects of a sanctions bill targeting Russia. "You know, I’m tired of dealing with him. So he didn’t respond to a carrot, so now we’re going to have to give him a kick.”
The International Criminal Court, based at The Hague, issued an arrest warrant for Putin in 2023. The court does not use the death penalty.
Democratic and Republican senators push for Russia sanctions bill
Senators from both parties voiced their support tonight for sanctions legislation targeting Russia and Putin.
Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., who is a co-sponsor of a Russia sanctions bill, told NBC News that legislation should be coming to the floor for a vote “very soon.”
“It’s going to be a really tough, bone-crushing message to Vladimir Putin, the United States is standing by Ukraine, and you will pay consequences economically,” he said.
Sen. Roger Marshall, R-Kan., said, “We need to follow the president’s lead.”
Trump expressed frustration with Putin today, telling reporters, “We get a lot of bulls--- thrown at us by Putin,” and “He’s very nice all the time, but it turns out to be meaningless.” Trump also said he might support a Russia sanctions bill.
Marshall said, “I’ve been pushing for more sanctions since before Russia invaded Ukraine, and if the president’s not making any progress, which it doesn’t seem, he seems to be, then I’d probably be OK going forward with, with more.”
"There’s a lot more that needs to be done” in the way of sanctions, he said.
Supreme Court won't take up case of Seattle police officers seeking anonymity in case tied to Jan. 6
The Supreme Court has decided not to weigh in on a case involving Seattle police officers who attended Trump's "Stop the Steal" rally on Jan. 6, 2021.
In a ruling by King County Superior Court of Washington and affirmed by the Washington State Court of Appeals, four former and current Seattle police officers were ordered to refile their lawsuit regarding public record requests under their true names. The officers want to remain anonymous as John Does.
Justice Elena Kagan, who handles emergency requests from that region, denied their application.
The issue at the heart of the case is whether the officers have a right to stay anonymous in public documents. The two lower courts ruled that they can be identified. But the officers argue that they did nothing wrong and that identifying them would violate their right to privacy.
The Seattle Police Department ordered an investigation following the Jan. 6 riot into whether officers who attended the rally violated the law. The investigation found that two officers — who are not plaintiffs in this suit — crossed a police barrier in violation of the law. But it found that three officers did not violate the law and that the probe involving the fourth officer was “inconclusive,” The Associated Press reported.
Netanyahu to meet with Hegseth tomorrow
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth will meet with Netanyahu at the Pentagon tomorrow morning, the Defense Department announced.
Hegseth attended a dinner at the White House last night with Trump, Netanyahu and other U.S. and Israeli officials.
Trump’s tariff deadline delay brings hope and confusion to trade partners and businesses
Trump’s latest tariff delay provided some hope to major trade partners Japan, South Korea and the European Union that deals to ease duties could still be reached while bewildering some smaller exporters, such as South Africa, and leaving companies with no clarity about the path forward.
Trump’s form letters informing 14 countries of planned tariff rates of 25% to 40% provided what he called a final warning about his “reciprocal” tariffs and pushed back tomorrow's previous deadline to Aug. 1, a date he said today was final, declaring: “No extensions will be granted.”
The move reflects Trump’s frustration with trade negotiations that are proving lengthier and more complicated than the “90 deals in 90 days” that he expected, trade experts and administration officials say.
Trump , who announced a 50% tariff on imported copper today and said long-threatened levies on semiconductors and pharmaceuticals were coming soon, said he has long favored simple tariffs over tedious trade talks that often involve red lines for some countries and their own requests for U.S. concessions.
Supreme Court allows mass federal layoffs to move forward
The Supreme Court will allow reductions in force and reorganizations at almost two dozen departments and agencies across the federal government to move forward while the appeals process is underway.
The justices made it clear the order is not about the legality of any individual decisions — only the legality of Trump’s executive order and the White House memo related to RIFs and reorganizations.
No decision breakdown was provided. Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson was the only justice to provide a dissenting opinion.
“In my view, this was the wrong decision at the wrong moment, especially given what little this Court knows about what is actually happening on the ground,” she wrote. “This case is about whether that action amounts to a structural overhaul that usurps Congress’s policymaking prerogatives—and it is hard to imagine deciding that question in any meaningful way after those changes have happened. Yet, for some reason, this Court sees fit to step in now and release the President’s wrecking ball at the outset of this litigation.”
“In my view,” Jackson wrote, “this decision is not only truly unfortunate but also hubristic and senseless.”
Justice Sonia Sotomayor concurred with the majority.
“I agree with Justice Jackson that the President cannot restructure federal agencies in a manner inconsistent with congressional mandates,” Sotomayor writes. “The plans themselves are not before this Court, at this stage, and we thus have no occasion to consider whether they can and will be carried out consistent with the constraints of law. I join the Court’s stay because it leaves the District Court free to consider those questions in the first instance.”
In February, Trump signed an executive order called “Implementing the President’s ‘Department of Government Efficiency’ Workforce Optimization Initiative,” in which he ordered sweeping cuts to the federal workforce. A subsequent memo from the White House told agencies to prepare for the cuts.
A federal judge in California in May paused the administration’s efforts to downsize the government. The government appealed that decision with the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.
It’s not clear how many workers the decision will affect.
AI voice used to impersonate Marco Rubio in messages to high-level officials, State Department says
An unknown person or group using artificial intelligence impersonated Secretary of State Marco Rubio to contact at least five high-level government officials in mid-June, according to a State Department cable obtained by NBC News.
The Washington Post first reported the cable.
“The actor likely aimed to manipulate targeted individuals using Al-generated text and voice messages, with the goal of gaining access to information or accounts,” the memo said.
The fake Rubio contacted at least three foreign ministers, a U.S. governor and a member of Congress, the cable said. It sent at least one of the targets a text message urging the target to speak on Signal and sent Signal voice messages to at least two of them.
Trump calls for 200% tariffs on drugs and 50% on copper
Trump said he plans to impose a tariff of up to 200% on imports of pharmaceuticals and a 50% tariff on copper-based goods.
The copper tariffs would come first, Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick said on CNBC.
“Copper [tariffs] will be set, likely to be put into place [at] the end of July, maybe Aug. 1,” Lutnick said, adding that Trump would post about the action on Truth Social this afternoon.
Earlier today, Trump said drug companies would have a year and a half to prepare for 200% duties that would go into effect on their products.
Stocks were largely unchanged today, with some analysts suggesting investors have grown accustomed to Trump’s shifting trade proposals and will react only when their impacts become clearer.
Judge temporarily blocks Trump administration from cutting off Planned Parenthood funding
A federal judge yesterday temporarily blocked the Trump administration from barring Medicaid funding for Planned Parenthood under a provision of Republicans’ sweeping tax and spending package.
U.S. District Judge Indira Talwani of Massachusetts issued the temporary restraining order, directing the Department of Health and Human Services to “take all steps necessary to ensure that Medicaid funding continues to be disbursed in the customary manner and timeframes” to Planned Parenthood.
Trump threatens ‘no extensions’ on new Aug. 1 tariff deadline, warns of higher import taxes
Trump said “no extensions” would be granted to the new Aug. 1 deadline he set yesterday for U.S. trading partners to negotiate new deals or face significantly higher tariffs on goods imported from their countries.
Trump wrote on Truth Social: “As per letters sent to various countries yesterday, in addition to letters that will be sent today, tomorrow, and for the next short period of time, TARIFFS WILL START BEING PAID ON AUGUST 1, 2025. There has been no change to this date, and there will be no change. In other words, all money will be due and payable starting AUGUST 1, 2025 — No extensions will be granted. Thank you for your attention to this matter!”
Stocks, already on edge after Trump began sending out warning letters yesterday, fell meaningfully into the red after the post went live, though they returned to nearly flat on the day shortly after noon.
Medical students fret over the new student loan cap in the ‘big, beautiful bill’
A provision tucked inside a sweeping bill signed into law by Trump last week will make it harder for thousands of aspiring doctors to finance their education as the country faces a growing shortage in that profession.
The move will cap the amount of federal loans students can borrow for graduate school to $20,500 a year — with a total limit of $100,000 — and cap loans for professional programs, such as medical, dental or law school, at $50,000 a year, with a total limit of $200,000.
IRS says churches can endorse political candidates without losing tax exemptions
The Internal Revenue Service agreed in a court filing that churches can endorse political candidates without fear of losing their tax-exempt status.
The IRS made the statement in a court case challenging the Johnson Amendment, a 1954 U.S. tax code provision that prohibits all 501(c)(3) non-profit organizations — including churches — from formally endorsing or opposing political candidates.
Trump concludes meeting by discussing the room's artwork
The Cabinet meeting has concluded.
Trump spent about 10 minutes at the end of the meeting discussing artwork and decor in the room.
Trump says he may 'straighten out New York'
After criticizing New York mayoral candidate Zohran Mamdani, Trump suggested he could take control of his hometown.
"We have tremendous power at the White House to run places when we have to," Trump said.
He added later, "We’re going to straighten out New York, it’s going to — maybe we’re going to have to straighten it out from Washington."
"We're going to do something for New York. I can't tell you what yet, but we're going to make New York great again," he added.
Mike Johnson: ‘No concerns at all’ that megabill will cost GOP seats in 2026
House Speaker Mike Johnson told NBC News that the newly enacted megabill means “everything” for the 2026 midterm elections, and sounded a note of confidence that it would help Republicans.
Asked if he has any concerns the legislation will cost his party seats, Johnson replied, “No concerns at all.”
“In fact, it’s going to gain seats for us. We’re that confident,” he said in a brief hallway interview today.
His remarks come as Democrats seek to make the GOP pay a political price for the bill, while Republicans encourage their members to lean into some of its provisions.
Trump says he will meet with Netanyahu again today
Trump said that he would meet with Netanyahu again today to discuss Gaza, after the two leaders held a meeting yesterday.
"He's coming over later. We're going to be talking about, I would say almost exclusively, Gaza," Trump said. "We gotta get that solved."
Steve Witkoff added that the sides were in "proximity talks."
"We are hopeful that by the end of this week, we will have an agreement that will bring us into a 60-day ceasefire," Witkoff, a special envoy, said. "Ten live hostages will be released. Nine deceased will be released."
Trump says he doesn't know who ordered pause of weapons shipment to Ukraine
Asked who initially ordered the pause of missiles and ammunition to Ukraine, Trump said he didn't know.
"I don't know, why don't you tell me?" Trump said in response to a reporter's question.
Trump said yesterday that the U.S. would send more weapons to Ukraine after the pause.
Trump says he's 'probably two days off' from sending E.U. a tariffs letter
Trump said the administration was "probably two days off" from sending a letter to the European Union outlining tariff rates on U.S. imports from the bloc of nations.
"We are talking to them," he added.
The president sent a series of letters to U.S. trading partners yesterday announcing tariff rates for imports from their countries.
Pam Bondi defends DOJ's conclusion there was no Epstein 'client list'
Trump criticized a reporter for asking a question about Jeffrey Epstein after the DOJ put out a memo saying there was no evidence that there was an "incriminating 'client list,'" which prompted anger from right-wing personalities.
"Are people still talking about this guy, this creep?" Trump said, seemingly frustrated by the attention being paid to the subject over others he and his Cabinet members were emphasizing. "That is unbelievable."
Attorney General Pam Bondi defended previous comments on Epstein, clarifying that in an interview months ago she referred to a file related to a purported "client list" that was sitting on her desk to be reviewed — comments that some misconstrued to be referring to an actual client list.
Trump ramps up criticism of Putin
Discussing Russia with reporters during his Cabinet meeting, Trump criticized the country, saying, "We get a lot of bulls--- thrown at us by Putin."
"He's very nice all the time, but it turns out to be meaningless," he said.
Trump frequently said on the campaign trail that he could end the war in Ukraine in one day — a claim that did not bear out.
Trump dedicates portion of Cabinet meeting to discussing Iran, the media and Biden
Trump spent a chunk of the Cabinet meeting praising the military's strikes on Iran while criticizing media coverage of the strikes and then-President Joe Biden's handling of the Afghanistan withdrawal, a topic he frequently raises.
Several minutes at the start of the meeting were dedicated to the Texas response, during which Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem was the main speaker.
Trump addresses Friday visit to Texas
Trump said that he would travel to Texas on Friday with first lady Melania Trump.
He said during today’s Cabinet meeting that he did not want to get in anyone’s way. (Responders are still trying to locate missing people.) White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt formally announced Trump’s trip yesterday.
The president did not provide further details about the trip.
Trump's Cabinet meeting has begun
Trump's Cabinet meeting has started. The meeting began with Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem talking about the department's response to the Texas floods. Trump then pivoted to celebrating his tax and spending bill, which was signed into law last week, before asking Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth to speak about the recent military strikes on Iran's nuclear enrichment facilities.
U.S. threatens California with legal action over transgender sports law
Education Secretary Linda McMahon yesterday threatened the state of California with legal action after the state refused to ban transgender girls from participating in girls’ sports as demanded by the Trump administration.
“@CAgovernor, you’ll be hearing from @AGPamBondi,” McMahon wrote, using the handles for California Gov. Gavin Newsom and U.S. Attorney General Pam Bondi.
Trump expected to attend soccer final on Sunday
Trump is expected to attend the FIFA Club World Cup final match at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey on Sunday, a senior administration official said.
The teams for the final match aren’t set, with two semifinal matches set to take place today and tomorrow, also at MetLife.
New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy, a Democrat, invited Trump to attend the final in a phone call last month. It's not clear that Trump is planning to attend with or in response to Murphy, or separately.
In other Trump-related soccer news, the head of FIFA, international soccer’s governing body, appeared at Trump Tower in New York with the president's son Eric Trump yesterday to show off the Club World Cup trophy and announce that FIFA was taking office space in Trump Tower.
It's the second such office for FIFA in the U.S. and will make the Trump Organization FIFA’s landlord in New York City.
Trump says he won't extend Aug. 1 tariff deadline
Trump said in a post on Truth Social that he would not grant extensions of the new Aug. 1 tariff deadline, when the administration will impose steep tariffs on imports from certain countries.
"There has been no change to this date, and there will be no change," Trump said in the post. "In other words, all money will be due and payable starting AUGUST 1, 2025 — No extensions will be granted."
Yesterday, Trump appeared open to granting extensions in certain cases. He said that the Aug. 1 deadline was "firm, but not 100% firm."
"If they call up and they say, would like to do something a different way, we’re going to be open to that," he said.
Trump-Netanyahu meeting revives bitterly opposed plan to relocate Palestinians
Trump and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu kept alive the idea of relocating people from the shattered Gaza Strip yesterday, despite widespread condemnation from close allies, the United Nations and human rights groups, as well as the Palestinians themselves.
Trump said during his meeting yesterday with Netanyahu at the White House that there was “great cooperation” from Israel’s neighbors to take in Palestinians, while Netanyahu said they were “getting close to finding several countries” willing to do so.
Georgia's lieutenant governor announces gubernatorial bid
Georgia Lt. Gov. Burt Jones, a Republican, is jumping into the state's gubernatorial race to seek a promotion.
Jones' bid had been long expected, and he made it official with a video on social media emphasizing his call to eliminate the state income tax, praise for Georgia's business record during his tenure in office, criticism of transgender athletes in women's sports, a promise to "end the fentanyl nightmare" and implement the "ultimate penalty" for fentanyl dealers.
The video also includes praise for and from Trump (although the president has not specifically endorsed his bid), and recounts Jones' role as a captain of the University of Georgia football team.
The GOP gubernatorial primary already includes another statewide official, Attorney General Chris Carr, and could grow. The top Democrat running is former Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms, and the race to replace the term-limited GOP Gov. Brian Kemp could become one of the top competitive gubernatorial races on the calendar next year.
Top White House economic adviser: Tariff price hikes are as unlikely as getting hit by a meteor
Stephen Miran, the chair of the White House's Council of Economic Advisers, said on CNBC this morning that price hikes from tariffs are "possible but other things are possible too."
"Eventually a meteor is going to strike or whatever, but we've been waiting and it's been many months now and that evidence has just not emerged," he said.
Miran was asked specifically about retailers who rushed to import inventory before the last round of global tariffs to avoid having to hike prices. With months having passed and that inventory likely dwindling, Miran said of possible looming price hikes: "Rare events happen. We get pandemics or meteors or whatever."
"I don't mean to be dismissive," he added. "All I mean to say is that a prediction is difficult."
Trump administration revokes terrorism designation of new Syrian leader’s group
The Trump administration is revoking the terrorism designation of a group led by Syria’s new president as part of a broader U.S. engagement with the transitional government since the ouster of former leader Bashar al-Assad late last year.
In a statement released yesterday, Secretary of State Marco Rubio said the move, which will take effect today, “recognizes the positive actions taken by the new Syrian government” under President Ahmad al-Sharaa.
China says it will retaliate on unfavorable deals after Trump warns Asia of higher tariffs
Reporting from Hong Kong
Chinese state media warned the Trump administration today against striking deals that sideline China, after the president announced that Asian countries would face higher tariffs starting Aug. 1, unless other arrangements are agreed on before then.
“If such situations arise, China will not accept them and will resolutely take countermeasures to safeguard its legitimate rights and interests,” the People’s Daily, a state-run newspaper, said in a commentary.
Schumer warns of looming fight over foreign aid and public broadcasting cuts
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., warned his caucus about the upcoming fight over House-passed legislation that would cut $9.4 billion from international health programs and public news outlets NPR and PBS.
"The stakes could not be higher — for the Congress, for our democracy, and for the American people," Schumer wrote in a letter to his Senate colleagues in which he called on Republicans to reject the bill.
"I will repeat: how Republicans answer this question on rescissions and other forthcoming issues will have grave implications for the Congress, the very role of the legislative branch, and, more importantly, our country," Schumer wrote.
Congress would need to act on the bill before July 18 to prevent it from expiring. Lawmakers are expected to vote next week on whether to take up the bill.
Netanyahu heads to Capitol Hill for more meetings today
Netanyahu heads to Capitol Hill today, where he will meet with House Speaker Mike Johnson, R-La., and other lawmakers, including a bipartisan group of senators. He is also expected to meet with Vice President JD Vance.
Netanyahu’s visit comes a day after he met with Trump in their first face-to-face meeting since the U.S. and Israel launched attacks on Iranian nuclear facilities. The two leaders discussed that military effort, as well as a proposal to end the fighting in Gaza.
Trump says the U.S. will send more weapons to Ukraine
Trump said yesterday that the United States is “going to send more weapons” to Ukraine for its defense in its war against Russia.
“We have to,” Trump said when he was asked whether the United States will send more weapons. “We’re going to have to send more weapons, defensive weapons, primarily, but they’re getting hit very, very hard. So many people are dying in that mess.”
The Defense Department recently halted weapon shipments to Ukraine, citing concerns over the U.S. military’s stockpile. The decision blindsided Ukraine, European allies, members of Congress and the State Department.
NBC News reported last week that Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth halted the weapons despite a military analysis that showed U.S. military readiness would not be affected by sending more munitions to Ukraine.
Trump tonight also said he was “not happy” with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
“I’m disappointed, frankly, that President Putin hasn’t stopped. I’m not happy about it, either,” Trump said.
Independent Dan Osborn launches another Nebraska Senate run
Independent Dan Osborn launched another run for the Senate in Nebraska today after having waged a surprisingly competitive, though ultimately unsuccessful, campaign last year.
And Osborn said the biggest difference between last year and next year will be his Republican opponent.
“Everything that I talk about, I think Pete Ricketts embodies,” Osborn said in an interview, referring to the Republican senator and former governor who is running for his first full Senate term next year after he won a special election last year.
“Billionaires shouldn’t be able to buy their way into Senate seats, first of all,” Osborn said. “But it’s this race to the bottom that people like me are experiencing, because it’s — everything is so expensive, and it’s just extremely difficult to get ahead in life.”
Trump and Netanyahu discuss Gaza ceasefire efforts amid victory lap on Iran
Trump welcomed Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to the White House yesterday for the first time since the U.S. and Israel took military action against Iran last month in an effort to dismantle the country’s nuclear capabilities.
The two leaders complimented each other on their alliance in the conflict, with Netanyahu presenting Trump with a letter he said he sent to the Nobel Prize committee, in which he nominated Trump for a Nobel Peace Prize, a longtime ambition for the president. Israel would be the second country to nominate Trump for the award.