Cassie Ventura tells Diddy trial she would give back $20m to undo freak-offs

1 hour ago Share Save Sakshi Venkatraman BBC News Reporting from New York court Share Save

Watch: The BBC's Nada Tawfik on how Diddy's lawyers used freak-off texts against Cassie

Cassie Ventura has tearfully told a court she would give back a $20m (£15m) legal settlement from Sean "Diddy" Combs if it meant she would never have taken part in his "humiliating" drug-fuelled sex parties. She rejected defence suggestions that her accusations were financially motivated as she wrapped up four days of testimony in the New York criminal trial of her ex-boyfriend. Ms Ventura, the government's star witness, faced questioning from both legal teams about her decade-long relationship with Mr Combs, and their "freak-off" sex sessions. Mr Combs, 55, has pleaded not guilty to racketeering, sex trafficking and transportation to engage in prostitution. He could face life in prison.

Ms Ventura's testimony revealed graphic details about her sex life with the rapper and the physical violence she allegedly endured from him. The rap mogul's lawyers have been trying to depict Ms Ventura, 38, as an eager participant in the sexual lifestyle. She testified this week that she was coerced into the sessions, which involved male escorts, because Mr Combs had threatened her with violence. On Friday she addressed a $20m pay-out he gave her after she filed a lawsuit against him in November 2023. The settlement, which came just one day after the filing of the legal action, was public knowledge, but the number was previously unknown. Mr Combs' lawyer, Anna Estevao, seemed to imply that Ms Ventura was strapped for cash before filing her lawsuit. The singer had just moved to her parents' house with her husband and children. Ms Ventura rejected this suggestion, later sharing that she would exchange the money for a life free of the "freak offs", which she said caused her physical injuries, would sometimes go on for days, and stifled her career as a singer. "I would have agency and autonomy," she said.

Reuters A courtroom sketch of Cassie Ventura