"Portraits From a Presidency," two- and three-dimensional portraits of members of the Clinton family, including more than 50 paintings, sculptures, engravings and photographs, goes on display Saturday at the Clinton Presidential Center, 1200 President Clinton Ave., Little Rock.
The exhibition, up through Dec. 7, includes works by Faith Ringgold, Peter Max, George Fisher and Chuck Close, "alongside personal, heartfelt pieces created by everyday Americans and citizens from foreign countries," according to a news release.
It will also feature the official White House portraits of President Bill Clinton and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton by Simmie Knox, the first Black American to receive a presidential portrait commission, on loan from the White House Historical Association/White House Collection.
The exhibit includes works in paint, woven pieces, wood, film, metal, glass, ink, stone, chalk, a grain of rice and Legos. Most are from the Clinton Presidential Library and Museum's collection; the exhibit also includes pieces on loan from personal collections.
"Every artist showcased in 'Portraits From a Presidency' has a story to tell, and we are so fortunate to be able to share their stories with our guests," says Jay Barth, director of the Clinton Presidential Library and Museum, in a news release. "This is what presidential libraries do so well, preserve pieces of history that might not be found in history books but provide insightful context to a presidential administration."
"We are thrilled to present this one-of-a-kind exhibition and to give our visitors an opportunity to see how artists -- from every walk of life -- portrayed the Clinton family," adds Clinton Foundation Executive Director Stephanie S. Streett. "From Faith Ringgold and Peter Max to everyday Americans, each artist's work shares a common purpose: to reflect the history, character, and values of those who have held our nation's highest office."
Museum hours are 9 a.m.-5 p.m. Monday-Saturday, 1-5 p.m. Sunday. Admission is $12; $10 for senior citizens 62-plus, college students and retired military (with valid ID); $7 for youngsters 6-17; free for children 0-5 and active-duty military. Visit clintonpresidentialcenter.org/exhibits.