Karnataka Deputy Chief Minister D. K. Shivakumar exuded confidence that the Congress will win 10 of total 13 seats in Dakshina Kannada and Udupi districts in the next State Assembly election expected to be held in 2028.
Addressing Congress workers at the party convention in Guruvayanakere, the Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) president said that he got a survey done in the twin districts recently, which has suggested the party’s return to glory in the two districts.
“The Congress will recapture the Belthangady Assembly seat too,” Mr. Shivakumar said.
The KPCC president said that he is confident that voters will vote as per their conscience in the next Assembly election in the two districts.
The twin districts were once the strong citadel of the Congress. In 2013 Assembly election, the party had won 10 seats in the two districts. The same will be repeated in the next election, he added.
The KPCC president said that the Congress has learnt lessons after losing seats in the previous Assembly election across the coastal belt. While asking party workers to win people’s confidence on the basis of the five guarantee schemes, he said that the workers should not lose self-confidence while facing the next election.
“When Congress built and shaped the lives of people, others (indirectly hitting out at the BJP) played with the feelings of people,” the Deputy Chief Minister said.
“None are permanent in politics. You should live on hope,” he told the workers.
Local body polls
The Deputy Chief Minister said that elections to local bodies in the State can be declared at any time and asked the party workers to gear up for the same.
The KPCC president asked the workers to add at least 10 new members to the party in each booth. “Do not hesitate to approach people (for enrolling to Congress) even if they are BJP voters. People take decisions (on supporting parties) on the basis of situations prevailing at the time of each election,” Mr. Shivakumar said.
The KPCC president claimed that if Congress won an election it meant people of all sections got an equal opportunity.
Published - April 20, 2025 08:31 pm IST