Subcommittee on Energy Holds Hearing on Grid Reliability
WASHINGTON, D.C. – Today, Congressman Bob Latta (OH-05), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Energy, led a hearing titled Keeping the Lights On: Examining the State of Regional Grid Reliability.
“Today’s grid operators made it clear that America needs more energy to be produced to keep up with our growing needs not just for consumers, but for the many small businesses, manufacturers, agriculture industry, and medical facilities that employ them,” said Chairman Latta. “Too many electric-generating facilities have been retired in recent years while new and emerging technologies are increasing the need. It is critical that we meet the growing demand for power, the need to secure it, and address the reliability challenges confronting our electric industry.”
Watch the full hearing here.
Below are key excerpts from today’s hearing:
Congressman Troy Balderson (OH-12): “Last year, PJM, ERCOT, SPP, and MISO jointly filed an amicus brief with the DC Circuit Court against the Biden EPA’s Clean Power Plan 2.0. I’m extremely grateful that just a few weeks ago, Administrator Zeldin announced the EPA will be reconsidering the Clean Power Plan 2.0, along with dozens of other Biden era rules and regulations. If the Clean Power Plan 2.0 were to remain in effect, would your service territory see an increased risk of rolling brownouts and blackouts?” Mr. Pablo Vegas: “Yes, that plan had risked more than 14,000 megawatts of existing coal plants that are serving the grid today, they would be at risk and that would be a significant reliability concern.”
Congresswoman Mariannette Miller-Meeks (IA-01): “In the 2024 long-term reliability assessment report, NERC recommends that to maintain demand and supply balance, dispatchable generators including carbon-based fuel generators must be available and capable of following changing electricity demand. And for the past two years when I was on this committee, we’ve hammered on this to ensure reliability. What measures are you taking to discourage premature retirement of carbon-based fuels, fuel generators such as the Clean Power Plan 2.0 rule? How are we able to maintain dispatchable or energy uh when we’re retiring, uh, carbon-based, uh, fuel generators prematurely?” Mr. Manu Asthana: “Part of it is sending the right market price signal to induce them to stay. Part of it is through, is working with our states and federal regulators to try to ensure that we don’t have rules that force these generators offline prematurely.”
Congresswoman Diana Harshbarger (TN-01): “In this scenario, let’s say that you experienced a wind drought that lasts 40 consecutive hours. How do you make up for that?” Ms. Jennifer Curran: “Thank you. Another familiar scenario that did happen to us. The way you make up for it is with resources that do have fuels that are available on demand. So, in MISO, that would be coal and gas generation that is able to run for that duration.”
###