TALLAHASSEE, Fla. – Today, Governor Ron DeSantis announces the following appointments to Florida’s Judicial Nominating Commissions:
Supreme Court Judicial Nominating Commission
Jason Gonzalez, of Tallahassee, is a Shareholder at Lawson Huck Gonzalez, PLLC. He earned both his bachelor’s degree and his juris doctor from the University of Florida. Gonzalez is appointed for a term ending July 1, 2027.
Second Judicial Circuit Judicial Nominating Commission
Nick Meros, of Tallahassee, is a Partner at Shutts & Bowen LLP. He earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Virginia and his juris doctor from Vanderbilt University. Meros is appointed for a term ending July 1, 2027.
Amanda Neff, of Tallahassee, is a Deputy General Counsel at the Reemployment Assistance Appeals Commission. She earned her bachelor’s degree from the University of South Carolina Aiken and her juris doctor from Florida Coastal School of Law. Neff is appointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2027.
Jason Vail, of Tallahassee, is a Shareholder at Allen Norton & Blue, PA. He earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Central Florida and his juris doctor from Florida State University. Vail is appointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2026.
Ninth Judicial Circuit Judicial Nominating Commission
Eric Reed, of Orlando, is a Shareholder at Lawson Huck Gonzalez, PLLC. He earned his bachelor’s degree from the University of Florida and his juris doctor from Barry University. Reed is appointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2027.
Tenth Judicial Circuit Judicial Nominating Commission
Kelvin Ready, of Auburndale, is an Associate at Gray Robinson, PA. He earned both his bachelor’s degree and his juris doctor from Florida State University. Ready is appointed for a term ending July 1, 2027.
Eleventh Judicial Circuit Judicial Nominating Commission
Eliot Pedrosa, of Miami, is a Partner at Jones Day. He earned his bachelor’s degree from Florida International University and his juris doctor from Harvard Law School. Pedrosa is appointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2026.
Fourteenth Judicial Circuit Judicial Nominating Commission
Todd Brister, of Lynn Haven, is the Owner of Todd C. Brister, Attorney at Law. He earned both his bachelor’s degree and his juris doctor from the University of Florida. Brister is reappointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2027.
William Lewis, of Panama City, is a Managing Member of William A. Lewis, Attorney at Law, PLLC. He earned his bachelor’s degree from Auburn University and his juris doctor from Stetson University. Lewis is reappointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2028.
Nineteenth Judicial Circuit Judicial Nominating Commission
Loren Esposito, of Palm City, is an Attorney at McCarthy Summers Wood Norman Melby & Schultz PA. She earned her bachelor’s degree from the University of Central Florida and her juris doctor from Nova Southeastern University. Esposito is appointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2027.
Mark Miller, of Palm City, is a Senior Attorney at Pacific Legal Foundation. He earned both his bachelor’s degree and his juris doctor from the University of Florida. Miller is appointed for a term ending July 1, 2027.
Barry Segal, of Vero Beach, is the Owner of The Law Office of Barry G. Segal, PA. He earned his bachelor’s degree from Florida State University and his juris doctor from Nova Southeastern University. Segal is appointed from a list of nominees recommended by the Florida Bar for a term ending July 1, 2028.