(‘The Right Choice’ is a series by The Indian Express that addresses common questions, misconceptions, and doubts surrounding undergraduate admissions. You can read the stories here.)
— Aparna Sharma
History and political science may seem like two sides of the same coin. Both options tend to discuss the philosophical and practical implications of political decisions and cultural movements. A history degree programme contributes to a deep understanding of the cultural and historical context of political decisions, social movements and cultural shifts over time. On the other hand, a political science degree focuses primarily on past and current events through the lens of politics.
Purpose
History programme allows students to cultivate a profound appreciation for past events and how they impact the present. History takes students through a dynamic curriculum that provides students with the opportunity to gain valuable critical thinking, research and analytical skills.
While political science programmes tend to focus coursework on government and policy, history majors often examine events in a broader context. By studying topics such as world history, American history, philosophy and foreign policy, students gain a general understanding of history and have the chance to dive deeper into specific topics of interest. This historical awareness is then put in the context of current events, including politics.
Scope
History and political science studies are nuanced. Both political science and history degrees allow students to develop their communication skills, as well as their ability to synthesize information. In addition, students often complete an experiential internship, capstone or seminar, where they are able to apply their studies to real-life situations. For those enrolled in a history programme, this is an opportunity to tailor the application of skills learned to specific areas of interest.
Career options
History majors generally have broadly applicable skills that prepare them for a wide array of career options that span various industries, from government to education and law. Those who earn their online bachelor’s degree in history often seek positions that require them to conduct research, synthesize information, make strategic recommendations and solve complex problems.
Those pursuing a degree in political science often seek careers in the government in some capacity, though this is not always true. Whether working in the public or private sector, political science majors often collect and interpret survey data, assist with political campaigns, forecast political trends and investigate the impact of various policies and laws at the local, state, federal and international levels. These jobs tend to require research, analysis and strong communication skills.
Who should choose
History and political science are often perceived as complementary disciplines due to their shared focus on political decisions and cultural movements. However, they exhibit distinct differences in practice. History explores the cultural and historical context of political decisions over time, while political science focuses primarily on analysing events through a political lens.
The two disciplines, however, nurture communication skills and information-synthesis abilities in students, preparing them for diverse career paths. Students from these programmes have a multitude of career options available to them, ranging from historians and policy analysts to diplomats and public relations specialists.
Both BA in History and BA in Political Science programmes are valuable, but they cater to different academic passions and professional pathways. History offers a window into the past, while political science provides insights into modern governance and power.
BA in history might be a better option for studies if one is passionate about the past, cultural heritage and how historical events have shaped the present, and if one is interested in careers related to academia, historical research, heritage, or cultural preservation.
History provides a broader understanding of the past, which is crucial for those interested in how historical events shape present-day societies and ideologies.
BA in history opens doors to postgraduate studies in history, archaeology, anthropology, or cultural studies, leading to research, teaching, or archival roles. History develops a strong ability in critical thinking, research, and understanding historical patterns that affect contemporary issues. It is suitable for students who want a career as a historian, museum curator, academician, researcher, or even work in heritage preservation, tourism, or archival management. History graduates also have a strong foundation for civil services and roles in journalism, NGOs, and think tanks.
BA in political science might be better if one is keen on understanding political systems, governance, law-making and current affairs, and aim for a career in public policy, government or international organisations.
Political science tends to be more relevant to understanding current global events, political dynamics, and governance, as it focuses on contemporary issues and international relations.
BA in political science leads to further study in political science, international relations, public policy, law, or related areas, which can widen your opportunities in diplomacy, public administration, political consultancy, or international organisations.
It offers a direct route to careers in government, public administration, diplomacy, political analysis, policy-making, or work with international organisations (UN, WHO). It also prepares you for civil services (similar to history), journalism (political reporting), and jobs in NGOs and think tanks related to governance and policy issues.
[Prof. (Dr.) Aparna Sharma is dean of the School of Liberal Arts at Noida International University]