In a major development, the White House has removed the official transcripts of US President Donald Trump’s public remarks from its government website and replaced it with videos of his public appearances at select venues.
A report by NBC News stated that transcripts of Trump’s speeches and comments were showing on the White House website (WhiteHouse.gov) until Sunday in the “Remarks” section. But the entire transcripts and remarks were taken down the following day, snapshots of the White House website available on internet archive show.
The lone transcript now available on the White House website is about Trump’s inaugural address which he gave on January 20, when he took the oath of office for his second tenure.
According to a White House official, government stenographers are still recording and transcribing Trump’s remarks but due to an internal policy change, the White House decided to purge the transcripts to make way for audio and video of President Trump’s appearances.
The White House has removed official transcripts of President Donald Trump’s public remarks from its government website, replacing them with selected videos of his public appearances.
The only transcript appearing now is of Trump’s inaugural address. https://t.co/ttQ5FQWEpT
— NBC News (@NBCNews) May 22, 2025
“In an effort to maintain consistency, previous transcripts that were available have been removed and replaced with the audio and visual components of that transcript,” the White House official told NBC News.
The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, further said the idea behind removing the official transcripts of President Trump and replacing it with audio and video content was intended to create “consistency” across the website and that people would get more accurate sense of the president by watching and listening to him, rather than reading transcripts.
White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt, in a statement said, “The president’s remarks are live on the website for every person in the world, including journalists, to access and watch for themselves. The Trump White House is the most transparent in history.”
Meanwhile, Vice President JD Vance’s office continued to provide full transcripts of his public remarks, sending them to the media as well.
(with inputs from NBC News)