Conflicting officials, social posts leave evacuation delay questions in Kerr County flooding
KERR COUNTY, Texas (KXAN) – Social media posts piece together a timeline of apparent delays in public notification by government officials in Kerr County, as devastating flood waters rose on the Guadalupe River early Friday morning.
While the National Weather Service issued a flash flood warning at 1:14 a.m. for portions of that area, it would be hours before the city and county’s Facebook pages posted their initial urgent directions for residents from local authorities.
The first came from the Kerrville Police Department, reposting an NWS alert at 5:16 a.m., adding: “Anyone near the Guadalupe River needs to move to higher ground now. Local streets are flooded in town and low water crossings are impassable. Do not drive into water.”
At 5:31 a.m., Kerr County posted: “Be safe and move to higher ground. Do not drive through water. Turn Around – Don’t Drown!”
A minute later, the county sheriff’s office also reposted NWS information on its own Facebook page, adding: “If you are near the water, move to higher ground immediately. Stay clear of low water crossings – turn around, don’t drown!”
The City of Kerrville’s Facebook page followed two hours later at 7:32 a.m., saying, “If you live along the Guadalupe River, please move to higher ground immediately.”
City and county officials have yet to fully explain the timing of those posts or other ways they might have notified people near the water, though subsequent posts advised following the county and City of Kerrville Facebook accounts for the latest updates. KXAN has requested records of communication between city, county and state officials – along with any emergency notifications made – to better understand decisions regarding their public warnings.
In a late morning press conference, after confirming multiple flood-related fatalities, Kerr County Judge Rob Kelly claimed officials “didn’t know this flood was coming.”
“This is the most dangerous river valley in the United States, and we deal with floods on a regular basis – when it rains, we get water,” Kelly said. “We had no reason to believe this was going to be anything like what has happened here, none whatsoever.”
In a separate press event later Friday, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick said Texas Division of Emergency Management Region 6 Assistant Chief Jay Hall “personally contacted the judges and mayors in that area and notified them all of potential flooding.”
“Yesterday morning, the message was sent,” Patrick said. “It is up to the local counties and mayors under the law to evacuate if they feel a need. That information was passed along.”
KXAN requested records of that communication and will continue following this story as it develops.