May 20, 2025
New FOIA Documents Reveal FEMA Wrongdoing in East Palestine, Ohio
WASHINGTON–New documents from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) obtained through a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request have revealed the government was aware of significant toxic exposure, health risks that would require at least 20 years of medical monitoring, and even the potential for cancer clusters following the Norfolk Southern train derailment spill and illegal vent-and-burn in East Palestine, Ohio in February 2023.
The newly obtained documents have confirmed Government Accountability Project whistleblower disclosures released over the course of the two years since this disaster that point to inevitable health impacts.
Originally, Government Accountability Project’s FOIA request was refused by FEMA to release this information leading to a lawsuit against the agency and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for this failure to respond. These bombshell documents reveal FEMA acknowledged the health risks the community and allies frequently spoke out about as a top concern.
The agency noted, “The occurrence of a cancer-cluster in [East Palestine] is not zero,” and expressed the need for a “tripwire to identify cancer clusters.” In 2023, a FEMA-appointed Federal Coordinator charged with assessing the unmet needs of the community was instructed not to directly engage with affected residents. In an internal email, the Federal Coordinator stated, “I have been advised best not to engage with the public…” and “the State does not want [the Federal Coordinator] to participate in the November 3 community meeting…”
On September 24, 2024, whistleblowers Dr. George Thompson and Stephen Petty disclosed concerns about the health of the community. In his disclosure, Dr. Thompson criticized the federal government for prematurely declaring the area safe. Additionally, he called for extensive monitoring and emphasized the threat of cancer clusters. Mr. Petty, agreed with Dr. Thompson and the claims of “no long-term health impacts” was premature due to the lack of health assessments completed in East Palestine.
“These documents confirm what East Palestine residents have feared: government officials knew about the serious health risks posed by the derailment and controlled burn but deliberately kept this information from the community,” said Lesley Pacey, Senior Environmental Officer at the Government Accountability Project. “It’s unconscionable that while federal officials were internally acknowledging the ‘really toxic plume’ created by the burn and discussing future cancer clusters, they were simultaneously avoiding direct communication with affected residents.”
After over two years, the small community of East Palestine suffered with serious health issues, consistently being ignored or dismissed by federal agency officials. These FOIA documents show FEMA knew the risk of chemical exposure and still withheld the aid residents desperately still need.
Contact: [email protected]
Government Accountability Project
Founded in 1977, Government Accountability Project is the leading international whistleblower protection organization. Through litigating whistleblower cases, publicizing concerns and developing legal reforms, Government Accountability Project’s mission is to protect the public interest by promoting government, corporate, and international organization accountability. Government Accountability Project is a nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy organization based in Washington, D.C.
###