Sherrill Introduces Bill to Require Elon Musk to Pass Drug Test to Maintain Special Government Employee Status
WASHINGTON, DC — Representative Mikie Sherrill (NJ-11) introduced new legislation to force Elon Musk — who has a well-documented history of drug use — and his Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) employees to pass a drug test, and participate in random drug testing in order to retain their Special Government Employee status with the United States government.
“Donald Trump has given billionaire Elon Musk the keys to our government, and with it, access to highly sensitive information — from Treasury and Social Security data to even our most guarded military plans. Those with access to sensitive information must be thoroughly vetted, clear-eyed, and exercise good judgment. Elon Musk and his DOGE employees should be held to the same standard as other executive branch employees, whether that’s for conflicts of interest or passing a drug test to maintain employment or a security clearance.
“In the wake of Trump’s top national security officials sharing classified information on an unsecured Signal group chat — putting our service members’ lives at risk — it’s more important than ever to protect the American people from the Trump Administration’s reckless incompetence and blatant disregard for national security,” said Rep. Sherrill.
Typically, government officials with access to highly sensitive information are required to pass a drug test and are subject to intermittent random testing as a condition of their employment. This ensures that officials who have access to our government’s most sensitive information are following the law and cannot be blackmailed for their illegal drug use. Sherrill’s bill would require Elon Musk and other Special Government Employees like him to consistently pass these same drug tests in order to maintain access to sensitive information.
Rep. Sherrill continues to lead the fight to protect New Jerseyans against Donald Trump and Elon Musk. She has called on eight Inspectors General to conduct investigations into Musk’s conflicts of interest and self-dealing at federal agencies, supported legislation to restrict his access to sensitive Social Security information at the Treasury Department, and stood with federal employees fired by Musk and DOGE.
###