According to a Fox News report, White House reporters who spent years covering the Biden administration are now asking a pointed question…
Were they misled about the president’s mental fitness—and did West Wing aides run cover to keep the truth from the American people?
Of course, the answer is yes.
One White House reporter says the White House clearly tried to hide the truth.
“This was a cover-up by any definition, but a quixotic one for the Biden team to have undertaken, for at the end of the day, there is only so much a White House staff can do to shield the President of the United States from exposure to the press and public. The cover-up had both private and public-facing dimensions,” the White House reporter told Fox News Digital.
The reporter said the private dimensions included “secretive strategizing and decision-making,” while the public strategy featured “brazen lies” such as video of Biden appearing confused being chalked up as “cheapfakes” and “the silencing of reporters who pressed the issue early on.”
Former White House Press Secretary Karine Jean-Pierre frequently shut down questions about Biden’s health, dismissing them as insentivie or “fringe” conspiracy theories.
“The subject that was denounced as so rude and fringe-y to ask about back then eventually emerged as the defining issue of the Biden presidency,” the White House reporter said.
A second White House reporter echoed the thoughts of “The Daily Show” host Jon Stewart, who on Monday blasted CNN for relentlessly promoting “a book about news they should’ve told you was news a year ago for free.”
“Sources are always more eager to talk after the fact, but it’s not a good look that CNN — a heavy hitter with plenty of weight to challenge the White House as the decline happened — barely scratched the surface of the story that Tapper now reports,” the second White House reporter told Fox News Digital.
“Late work still deserves half credit though,” they added.
Full report over at Fox News:
Credibility crisis: White House reporters speak out on whether Biden's mental decline was deliberately hidden https://t.co/LsDvFzISPf
— Fox News (@FoxNews) May 27, 2025