Michael Anton became the 33rd Director of the Secretary’s Policy Planning Staff on January 20, 2025.

Before returning to government, Anton was a Senior Fellow at the Claremont Institute, where he taught in the Institute’s five fellowship programs, wrote for the Claremont Review of Books, and was researching a book on the state of California. Anton was concurrently a Lecturer in Politics at Hillsdale College, for which he designed and hosted the College’s online course “American Foreign Policy” and taught courses on national security, grand strategy, and political philosophy at the undergraduate and graduate levels.

Anton has served a total of nine years in government, in the administrations of California Governor Pete Wilson, New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, President George W. Bush, and President Donald J. Trump. In President Trump’s first administration, Anton served as Deputy Assistant to the President and Deputy National Security Advisor for Strategic Communication on the National Security Council Staff at the White House. He also served for four years on the NSC staff in the George W. Bush administration. Between those two administrations, Anton spent 12 years in the private sector in various roles in media and finance.

Anton is the author of three books and co-editor of one essay collection. He also has two books of his own previously published essays forthcoming. In addition, Anton has been widely published in the mainstream and academic presses, including in the Wall Street Journal, the Washington Post, Interpretation, and Perspectives on Political Science. Anton’s numerous articles on foreign and national security policy include “America and the Liberal International Order” (American Affairs, 2017), “The Trump Doctrine” (Foreign Policy, 2019), and “The Containment of George Kennan” (Claremont Review of Books, 2023). He is perhaps best known as the author of “The Flight 93 Election,” the 2016 viral essay that galvanized many to support then-candidate Trump.