Ranking Member Espaillat Statement at Fiscal Year 2026 Budget Hearing for the Government Accountability Office, Congressional Budget Office, and United States Government Publishing Office
Congressman Adriano Espaillat (D-NY-13), Ranking Member of the Legislative Branch Subcommittee, delivered the following remarks at the Subcommittee's fiscal year 2026 budget hearing for the Government Accountability Office, Congressional Budget Office, and United States Government Publishing Office:
-As Prepared For Delivery-
Mr. Dodaro, Dr. Swagel, and Mr. Halpern, thank you all for being here today.
I commend each of you and your staff for your efforts in reinforcing Congress's constitutional power of the purse and for dedicating the necessary resources to support this committee.
Mr. Dodaro. It is my understanding that your term ends in December. Your commitment to the Government Accountability Office has been unwavering. Under your leadership, the GAO has been a premier employer. Thank you for your hard work and for leading a team of amazing individuals who continually provide support to Congress.
For fiscal year 2026, the GAO has requested $933.9 million an increase of 15 percent. I look forward to hearing about GAO’s funding priorities including increases for Science and Technology research. I also hope you will shed light on the recent threats to your field office locations by the Trump administration and the potential impacts on the GAO.
The Congressional Budget Office has requested $75.8 million, representing an 8.2 percent increase. This request aims to support congressional needs and improve the timeliness of reports.
The Government Publishing Office has requested $135.4 million an increase of 2.6 percent. I am interested in learning about the costs saved by transitioning from printed materials to digital information.
I plan to ask each of you about how the frozen budgets provided by the fiscal year 2025 full-year continuing resolution have compounded your fiscal year 2026 needs.
As I have said in the past, each of your Agencies has a tremendous responsibility and provides crucial functions in our democracy.
As Ranking Member, I am committed to ensuring that your Agencies have the resources needed to build on your excellent records, to provide timely expert assistance to Congress, and to meet the challenges of your varied missions.
I look forward to each of your testimonies.
I yield back.
###