Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday (April 14, 2025) hit out at the Congress, accusing it of exploiting the “holy Constitution as a weapon to grab power”. He slammed the Congress for granting reservation in Karnataka on the “basis of religion” and practising “appeasement politics”.
“Whenever the Congress saw a crisis, they crushed the Constitution. During the Emergency, it crushed the spirit of the Constitution so that they could stay in power,” he said. “Our Constitution provided reservations for Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes, and Other Backward Classes, but the Congress never cared about those benefits reaching the SCs, STs and OBCs.”
Mr. Modi said for its “political game”, the Congress had gone “against the dream of Babasaheb Ambedkar, who evolved a system for social justice in the Constitution, and backstabbed him for politics of appeasement.”
“In Karnataka, the Congress government has granted reservations in government tenders based on religion, even though Babasaheb had asserted there would be no provision for religion-based reservation. They have snatched the rights of SCs, STs and OBCs and given reservation on the basis of religion,” he added.
Saying that the Congress’s politics has harmed the Muslim community, Mr. Modi said the party made “a handful of fundamentalists happy” even as the community remained poor and uneducated.
“The biggest example of Congress’s ill-conceived policy is the Waqf law. After the country’s Independence till 2013, the Waqf law was in place, but just to win elections and for its appeasement, vote-bank politics, the Congress, in the last months of 2013, amended the Waqf law for political gains,” he said.
Mr. Modi challenged the Congress to appoint a Muslim as the party president. “If in the true sense they have even a little bit of compassion towards Muslims, then the Congress party should have appointed a Muslim as its president. Why don’t they do it?”
The Prime Minister said that within the party, the Congress does not give anything to the Muslims, but “keep snatching the rights of the country’s citizens, which has exposed their intention of not working towards the welfare of anyone, especially the Muslims.”
Mr. Modi said the Constitution’s “spirit and sentiment” indicate that there should be a uniform citizen code for everyone. Terming this the “secular civil code”, he said the Congress never implemented it. “In Uttarakhand, after the BJP formed its government, a secular civil code was implemented. But see the misfortune of the country, people carrying the Constitution in their pocket, the people of the Congress, are opposing it.”
Blaming the Congress for insulting Ambedkar, Mr. Modi said Babasaheb’s life, struggles and message have been the cornerstone of his government’s 11-year journey. “Every decision, every policy, and every day of the government has been dedicated to his vision,” he added while addressing a gathering in Haryana’s Hisar after laying the foundation stone of a new terminal at the Maharaja Agrasen airport. He also flagged off a flight to Ayodhya.
Published - April 14, 2025 12:45 pm IST